4121754


Gods & Magic

Second Edition

Test Your Convictions

In a land without fate and a world too often void of justice, it falls to the gods
to make or break the people who call upon them for salvation—or draw their
ire. Swear yourself to the might of the gods and the power of their causes, or
reject their offerings to live a life that’s yours and yours alone!

LOST OMENS GODS & MAGIC

Lost Omens Gods & Magic offers details on major gods found in the Inner Sea
region, including what forms their pleasure or wrath might take. It also presents
rules for over a hundred other deities and philosophies so you can find the cause
that best fits your convictions and take up weapons and magic in its service!

19092577

4121754

LOST OMENS

Gods & Magic
paizo.com/pathfinder

Printed in China.

PZO9303
19092577


19092577

4121755

4121755


LOST OMENS

Gods & Magic

19092578

19092578

4121755


19092578

4121756

4121756

19092579

19092579


AUTHORS
Robert Adducci, Amirali Attar Olyaee,
Calder CaDavid, James Case, Adam Daigle,
Katina Davis, Leo Glass, Joshua Grinlinton,
James Jacobs, Virginia Jordan, Jason Keeley,
Jacky Leung, Lyz Liddell, Ron Lundeen,
Stephanie Lundeen, Jacob W. Michaels,
Matt Morris, Dave Nelson, Samantha Phelan,
Jennifer Povey, Jessica Redekop,
Nathan Reinecke, Patrick Renie,
David N. Ross, Simone D. Sallé,
Michael Sayre, David Schwartz,
Shahreena Shahrani, Isabelle Thorne,
Marc Thuot, Jason Tondro, and Diego Valdez

Table of Contents

DEVELOPMENT LEADS
Eleanor Ferron and Luis Loza
DESIGN LEAD
Mark Seifter
EDITING LEAD
James Case
EDITORS
Judy Bauer, James Case, Leo Glass, Avi Kool,
Lyz Liddell, Adrian Ng, and Lu Pellazar
COVER ARTIST
Ekaterina Burmak
INTERIOR ARTISTS
Klaher Baklaher, Rogier van de Beek,
Yanis Cardin, Tomasz Chistowski,
Sergio Cosmai, Emile Denis,
Michele Esposito, Igor Grechanyi,
Katerina Kirillova, Ksenia Kozhevnikova,
Valeria Lutfullina, Will O’Brien,
Mary Jane Pajaron, Mikhail Palamarchuk,
Jose Parodi, Roberto Pitturru,
Maichol Quinto, Kevin A. Ross, and
Bryan Sola
ART DIRECTION
Sarah E. Robinson
PAGE LAYOUT
Sonja Morris
CREATIVE DIRECTOR
James Jacobs
PROJECT MANAGER
Gabriel Waluconis

Overview6

4121756

This overview presents a look at faith within the Inner Sea region and gives rules for changing
faiths, worshipping non-mainstream aspects of a god, and making characters who were brought
up with a strong grounding in a particular belief.

Gods of the Inner Sea

10

These pages present the 20 gods most integral to the culture of the Inner Sea region, as well as
20 lesser-known gods that are also commonly worshipped within the region. Conjure the mighty
avatars of these beings as a sign of their favor, or see their wrath and blessings manifest in the
form of divine intercessions!

Demigods and Other Divinities

72

Divinity springs from many fonts, and not all who grant their divine aid hold the vaunted title
of god. From the capricious and fey Eldest of the First World to the raw power of the elemental
lords, these unconventional powers embody narrower aspects than those who are considered
true gods, but their followers are no less powerful for it.

PUBLISHER
Erik Mona

Philosophies and Spirituality

92

With hundreds of cultures come a thousand schools of thought. Many find faith beyond the
edicts of a single god, whether they seek answers through their ancestors or try to achieve
salvation by accumulating vast wealth.

Character Options
Paizo Inc.
7120 185th Ave NE, Ste 120
Redmond, WA 98052-0577

paizo.com

102

Where gods hold sway, they often clash, as the demands of the benevolent, the malicious, and
the indifferent war with one another for the fate of lives and souls. This chapter presents benefits
the gods grant their followers so they can better crusade in a hostile world.

Feats104

Whether they are gained through divine fervor or training, these feats offer skills and
powers for the devoted—or for those who specifically work against the faithful.


19092579

4121757

4121757

19092580

19092580


Spells106

4121757

One of the greatest blessings that gods can offer their servants is divine
magic—including the ability to cast spells that can’t be gained from other
sources. Explore new divine spells, along with magic from other traditions
associated with specific deities within the Inner Sea region.

Domains112

The gods hold sway over many aspects of everyday mortal life, leading many people
to beseech them for boons or protection related to the gods’ areas of concern. Those
who devote their lives to these gods can gain greater influence over these aspects,
holding the power of wyrmfire or the crushing weight of sorrow in their hands.
Discover the secrets of 18 new domains, from the frozen chill of the cold domain to the
squirming masses of the swarm domain.

Items and Weapons

120

Nearly every culture holds specific items sacred, and religious relics are upheld within
many faiths. Wield new weapons and lay claim to holy items in your quest to spread
your god’s teachings and fight for your own beliefs.

Appendix124
This appendix presents the basic rules for over a hundred other prominent deities worshipped in
the Age of Lost Omens, from the demon lords of the Abyss to the gods of distant Tian Xia. Each
deity’s entry contains their alignment and the alignments allowed for their worshippers; complete
worshipper benefits such as favored skills, favored weapons, domains, granted spells, and divine
fonts; and the critical edicts and anathema of the faith. Entries also provide divine abilities to be
used with the new background presented on page 9 of this book, allowing your characters to be
raised in the secrets of obscure orders and traditions, from the mystery cults of Magnimar to the
secretive worship of Asmodeus’s eight archdevils.

Glossary and Index

134
3


19092580

4121758

4121758


19092581

19092581

4121758


19092581

4121759

4121759


19092582

19092582

4121759


19092582

4121760

4121760


Overview

19092583

19092583

A defining characteristic of fantasy as a genre is the
presence and use of magic—a fantasy roleplaying game
without magic would be like a science fiction story
without technology or a horror story without fear!
Pathfinder posits four traditions of magic: arcane, divine,
occult, and primal. For a faithful character, divine magic
is usually the most intrinsically appealing, as it reflects a
direct connection to a deity.
Divine magic is the intersection of the instinctual and
faith-based vital essence that rules over life and death, and
the otherworldly spiritual essence that forms the building
blocks of all souls. It can close wounds in seconds, call
down blasts of divine vengeance, uncover hidden truths,
reveal the future, and even temporarily turn a devotee into
an avatar of their god. The idea of divine might invokes
images of a righteous crusader, but neutral and evil gods
similarly imbue their devotees with power to further
their own causes. The divine tradition also encompasses
spiritual philosophies that don’t involve any specific deity,
as well as pantheons of multiple deities.
This book presents an in-depth look at the gods
presented in Chapter 8 of the Pathfinder Core Rulebook,
including alternate domains and divine intercessions each
god grants. Following that are 20 additional gods, with
rules for playing their clerics and champions, including
how to assume the forms of their mighty avatars.
Following these entries, this book describes demigod

4121760

pantheons, such as the Eldest and the empyreal lords,
as well as spiritual philosophies, including the Green
Faith and Sangpotshi. This book also includes exciting
new domains, feats, items, spells, and weapons useful for
many characters, not just clerics.

WHY BELIEF MATTERS
Faith is important in any fantasy world where mortals
can wield divine power. On Golarion, the existence of
the gods is not a speculative question. To the contrary,
the veracity of each of the gods is demonstrable, visible
through manifestations ranging from powerful divine
spells to portentous curses and boons.
Belief and devotion shape life on Golarion in numerous
ways. Generally, the gods imbue their most devoted
followers with their magic. A cleric’s adherence to the
principles and observances of their god underpins their
ability to access the divine magic that powers their spells.
A champion forges their very identity in devotion to their
deity and cause, from which they draw their righteous
zeal. Other mortals often view with awe those characters
commanding divine power through such intense piety.
Yet these are exceptional cases, and more mundane
faith is common. A fighter might worship Kurgess, the
god of healthy competition and physical development,
while a barbarian similarly follows Gorum, the god
of strength and battle, each finding inspiration for

6

19092583

4121761

4121761

19092584

19092584


their personal growth and values in their worship.
Wilderness‑roaming characters, such as rangers and
druids (whose magic derives from primal forces rather
than the divine), may feel drawn to the Green Faith or
Shoanti animism as an expression of their connection to
the earth—or they might venerate Gozreh, the god of
nature; Sarenrae, the goddess of the sun; or Tsukiyo, the
god of the moon. Scholarly characters, such as alchemists
and wizards, may recognize that religious devotions
provide them with a connection to community, a sense
of purpose, or even a path to greater personal power.
They might worship a deity associated with intellectual
pursuits, like the god of magic, Nethys, or they might
enjoy established and well-connected churches, such as
those of Abadar, the god of cities and wealth; Iomedae,
the goddess of justice and honor; or Asmodeus, the god
of tyranny and pride. Sorcerers and bards, on the other
hand, might be inspired to worship Shelyn, the goddess
of art and love; Desna, the goddess of luck and travel; or
even Cayden Cailean, the god of freedom and alcohol.
Devotion might be woven into their self-expression, or
it could provide a connection to like-minded followers,
or give them a deeper sense of purpose. Characters
who rely on perfecting their skills, such as rogues and
monks, might be drawn to the worship of Irori, the god
of knowledge and self-perfection—or of Norgorber, the
god of secret knowledge and thievery.
While most characters faithful enough to gain power
from their deity do so in service to a single god or goddess,
most people on Golarion venerate many deities, giving
praise or asking for aid based on the circumstances of
their lives. The focus of a person’s faith may change as
circumstances do. A barbarian might have a central
devotion to Chaldira, the halfling god of battle and
luck, but add prayers to Shelyn, god of beauty and love,
when she finds true love. Upon the untimely death of
her lover, she may turn to Pharasma, god of death and
fate, or to Desna, god of dreams, to ease her grief—or to
Calistria, god of vengeance, to repay the death. Similarly, a
dishonored politician might continue to honor Gruhastha
the Keeper but offer a prayer to Achaekek, the mantis god
of assassins and death, to regain her power.

with Asmodeus has inarguably extended his diabolical
influence across the Inner Sea region. The success of
the undead nation of Geb is a boon to Urgathoa, while
simultaneously offering endless worry to Pharasma
and her legions of psychopomps. The destruction of
Lastwall was a blow to Iomedae, greatly reducing her
influence in that region. While these gods also have
myriad extraplanar and extra-worldly concerns beyond
mortal consideration, they are still—to varying degrees
and at various times—deeply invested in the dramas
playing out across Golarion, and they manifest their
will accordingly.
Despite a long and deep divine connection to Golarion,
it is extremely rare for a god to appear in the world. The
gift of divine power is the most common way in which the
gods influence mortal (as well as undead and immortal)
lives on the planet. Divine intercession, through the
granting of boons and curses, is another way in which the
gods spread their influence. Golarion’s deities don’t spend
the majority of their time doling out curses and boons,
nor does every god pay attention to every mortal—no god
has that much time amid their plots and alliances playing
out on an extraplanar scale. Yet when their attention is
attracted through particular merit or outrage, or when it
fits into a larger objective, they may intercede to bless or
to curse a mortal who has drawn their attention. Finally,
a god might speak to a mortal through a dream, portent,
or singular religious experience. Such moments can shape
a character’s deepest values and motives, and they are
entirely at the GM’s discretion.
Campaigns set on worlds other than Golarion can still
use the rules and information found in this book to deepen
religious themes. The gods exert their influence across
the multiverse, and they might enact dramas similar to
those described here on any world of the GM’s creation.
Alternatively, different gods might take the center stage
in another world’s pantheon, or they might have entirely
different relationships. On a different world, Rovagug
might be the primary deity and principal villain behind
truly monstrous schemes, and Nethys—in his role as a
destroyer—might support the Rough Beast.

THE ROLE OF THE GODS

This book presents the following new rules elements.

As befits a reality in which gods and magic are
demonstrable, the deities of the Pathfinder setting are not
aloof constructs whose power merely provides options
for character creation. They are deeply involved in the
fabric of reality, shaping the course of Golarion’s people in
particular. Ascension to godhood is a real and living thing
on Golarion; deities including Arazni, Cayden Cailean,
Iomedae, Norgorber, and most recently Casandalee were
mortals on Golarion who ascended to become deities.
Others, such as Abadar and Sarenrae, have their homes
in other planes and predate Golarion’s existence, yet they
nevertheless take an active interest in its workings.
Political upheavals can favor particular gods, and
some show deities’ direct influence. Cheliax’s pact

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121761

RULES ELEMENTS
Alternate Domains
Each deity grants four domains­—these are their primary
domains. Some deities, however, have such expansive
jurisdiction that more than four domains are appropriate
for them. Many of these alternate domains are available
only to characters who specialize in these areas, as they
often fall outside of their deity’s main purposes or areas
of focus. This book lists alternate domains a deity may
have. Followers of a deity do not initially have access
to these alternate domains, but a cleric can take the
Expanded Domain Initiate feat on the following page to
gain access to one of their deity’s alternate domains, and
either a cleric or a champion from an unusual branch

7

19092584

4121762

4121762


of their faith can take the Splinter Faith feat below to
redefine the domains available to them.

EXPANDED DOMAIN INITIATE
CLERIC

Prerequisites Domain Initiate
You have long venerated one of your deity’s lesser-known
aspects. Select one domain from your deity’s alternate
domains. You gain access to that domain and an initial
domain spell for that domain.

CHAMPION

FEAT 1

CLERIC

Your faith in your deity is represented in an extremely
unusual way that some might call heretical. When you select
this feat, you should detail the fundamental tenets of your
splinter faith, though it shouldn’t affect the deity’s edicts
or anathema. Choose four domains. These domains must
be chosen from among your deity’s domains, your deity’s
alternate domains, and up to one domain that isn’t on either
list and isn’t anathematic to your deity. Any domain spell
you cast from a domain that isn’t on either of your deity’s
lists is always heightened to 1 level lower than usual for a
focus spell. For the purpose of abilities that depend on your
deity’s domains, the four domains you chose are your deity’s
domains, and any of your deity’s domains you didn’t choose
are now among your deity’s alternate domains.
Special Unless you take this feat at 1st level, changing the
way you relate to your deity requires retraining, as described
in the Changing Faith section below. If you take this feat and
previously benefited from any effect that requires a domain
your splinter faith doesn’t include, such as a domain spell from
Domain Initiate, you lose that effect.

Changing Faith
Whether dramatic or gradual, a character may have
a crisis of faith or even a fall from grace. When this
happens, the character is no longer able to use the spells,
feats, and other class features tied to their now-lost faith.
As reflects the genuine struggle within their soul, such
characters may find themselves hobbled in their actions
and interactions until they are restored to good standing
via the atone ritual—or, in the case of a more complete
break, until they retrain.
Retraining requires substantial downtime—in most
cases, at least a month. A character who wishes to
retrain into a different faith with similar concerns and
domains requires less time to convert than a character
moving into a radically divergent faith. Thus, a cleric
of Grandmother Spider might move to the worship of
Calistria with a month’s tutelage and service in one of
her temples. However, that same cleric of Grandmother
Spider could not so easily become a priest of Asmodeus,
even though both deities share the trickery domain—their
longstanding animosity is reflected in their diametrically
opposed doctrines and cultures. Such a conversion is not
impossible but could take several months of downtime or
happen piecemeal over months of in-game development.
In some instances, particularly in the case of PCs or
other high-profile targets of conversion, a new deity
might send an emissary directly to a character struggling
with a crisis of faith in order to tempt that character
to righteousness or villainy. In these cases, the emissary
might be able to offer a near-immediate transformation
as an enticement, funneling vital and spiritual essence
primed to the deity’s philosophy into the converting
character to remove the need for any downtime at all.
Such a transformation is not without risks, however, and
may come with complications down the line.

19092585

19092585

FEAT 4

SPLINTER FAITH

4121762

8

19092585

4121763

4121763

19092586

19092586


At the GM’s discretion, characters for whom divine
patronage is essential but who lose faith completely can
retrain into a new class. A champion might retrain as a
fighter or a ranger, swapping out faith-based feats and
class features for appropriate analogues. The length of
downtime required in any of these cases is at the GM’s
discretion, though the player and GM are advised to
work together to determine a suitable time frame
that does not fully interrupt play and can help tell a
satisfying story.

Divine Intercession
To make their influence on Golarion felt directly—but
without manifesting on the planet in all their divine
glory—each god has the tool of divine intercession.
Divine intercession manifests as a boon or a curse, of
varying duration and power, visited upon a mortal.
Curses are not triggered simply by doing something a
god does not like, or everyone in Golarion would be
cursed all the time; they are often reserved for followers
of the god who commit anathema that aren’t strong
enough to warrant ejection from the faith, or those
who have committed shocking blasphemies. Conversely,
an unaffiliated worshipper embroiled in high-profile
actions that are anathema to a god could earn a curse.
Similarly, boons are not automatically granted to anyone
petitioning the god. Certainly, someone who upholds a
deity’s edicts could earn a boon, especially when acting
under adverse circumstances. Most often, as befits their
inscrutable nature, a deity will bestow a boon or a
curse for their own reasons. Perhaps a mission is of dire
importance to a god’s plan for a specific place or people,
or perhaps the survival of a particular character figures
in their plans decades from now.
The divine intercessions provided in each entry
are examples, and the GM can have any deity grant
a different effect than the intercessions provided.
These intercessions are special and are always at the
deity’s, and thus the GM’s, direct discretion, with the
GM deciding when a boon or curse goes into effect.
The GM is also at liberty to remove a boon or curse
as is appropriate for the game’s story. A PC or NPC
can never select a feat, spell, or other rules option that
entitles them to a divine boon or bestows a divine
curse upon foes. Minor intercessions are memorable
for the recipient, providing either a relatively modest
and long-lasting effect or a spectacular but fleeting one.
Moderate intercessions are hugely significant events
that typically come with permanent consequences, and
major intercessions can pivotally reshape a recipient’s
life, granting powers wildly beyond their innate abilities
or inflicting life‑changing curses.

New Background
The following background is available to characters of
any class. Each deity stat block in this book presents a
pair of associated ability scores that this background can
boost in its Divine Ability entry.

RAISED BY BELIEF

BACKGROUND

Whether in a monastery, a religious household, or just as
part of your everyday life, your upbringing was steeped in
the traditions of a faith or philosophy. You might remain
committed or you may have turned from your childhood
creed, but your skills are still founded in your devotion.
Choose two ability boosts. One boost must be to an ability
specified in the Divine Ability entry for your deity, and one is
a free ability boost.
You’re trained in your deity’s associated skill, and you gain
Assurance with that skill. You gain a Lore skill with a subcategory
associated with your deity (Abadar Lore, for instance).

Favored Weapon
Each deity has a favored weapon. These weapons are
not restricted for use by their clerics and champions
alone; lay worshippers often train with and wield them
in battle as another way to show their devotion. Each of
the favored weapons detailed in this book is available to
any character with access to it. The same is true of the
divine items included in this book.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

Theme Templates
Theme templates (introduced in the Lost Omens
Character Guide) allow a GM to replicate creatures
and NPCs that worship specific deities. When you add a
theme template that grants many additional abilities, you
should consider removing one or more of the creature’s
original abilities to compensate, or raising the creature’s
level by 1 and adjusting its statistics accordingly so as
to add the template’s abilities without taking anything
away. Either way, a template adds abilities based on the
creature’s final level; for example, if you raised a 6th-level
creature to 7th level, adjusted its numbers, and added a
template, it would gain the 7th-level or higher template
abilities. A deity’s theme template works as follows.
All Creatures: Add any traits in the deity’s alignment.
Remove any alignment traits not in the deity’s alignment.
1st Level or Higher: Add the deity’s favored weapon and
a wooden religious symbol of the deity to the creature’s
items. Add a favored weapon Strike with an attack bonus
equal to the creature’s highest melee or ranged Strike
(whichever is appropriate). If the favored weapon is
simple, increase the damage die of that Strike by one step.
4th Level or Higher: The creature can cast the initial
domain spell of one of the deity’s domains and gains a
pool of 1 Focus Point.
7th Level or Higher: The creature can cast the 1st‑level
spell the deity grants clerics three times per day as a
divine innate spell.
12th Level or Higher: The creature can cast the advanced
domain spell of the domain you chose for 4th level or
higher, and its focus pool increases to 2 Focus Points.
17th Level or Higher: The creature has been truly
blessed. Either the creature can cast the deity’s other
deity spells of up to 7th level once per day each as divine
innate spells, or, at the GM’s discretion, the creature
gains the benefits of one of the deity’s boons.

4121763

9

19092586

4121764

4121764


Gods of the Inner Sea

19092587

19092587

The gods venerated—or feared—by the people of the
Inner Sea region are as diverse as the people themselves.
This chapter provides information about many of the
gods that are important in the region and beyond.
While the 20 primary deities of the Inner Sea region are
well known due to either widespread worship or their
historical tendency to help or harm the people who live
there, the other 20 gods detailed in this chapter grant
their worshippers just as much power and are just as
important in their worshippers’ lives.

USING THE ENTRIES
The entries for deities in this book use one of the two
stat block formats described below to present the
vital information required for worship, depending
on the prominence of the particular deity. Additional
information useful for playing a champion, cleric, or
worshipper of one of the 20 core deities is available in
Chapter 8 of the Pathfinder Core Rulebook.

Core Deities
The entries for the 20 deities who are most influential
in the Inner Sea region present information useful for
understanding those gods. Each entry includes three
boons and three curses the god might use to express
their approval of or displeasure at a specific deed; the
power of these intercessions varies between deities,
depending on their specific focuses and interest in

4121764

mortal concerns. Each section also begins with statistics
for the deity, which use the following format.
Name: The deity’s name plus a common title or epithet.
Alignment: The deity’s alignment and areas of concern.
Realm: Where the deity and the souls of their deceased
faithful live among the Outer Planes, including the name
of the god’s divine realm, if they have one.
Allies: Gods this deity has good working or personal
relationships with and whom they can call on for aid.
Enemies: Gods this deity often comes into conflict
with due to philosophical differences, conflicts in aims,
or personal vendettas.
Relationships: Gods the deity has the most important
connections to, including siblings, lovers, or other vital
relationships. This section is omitted if it doesn’t apply
to the god.
Temples: If temples to this deity tend to be in a certain
kind of place, or if they tend to serve a certain societal
function, that information is listed here.
Worshippers: The kind of people who tend to worship
this deity, aside from dedicated priests.
Sacred Animal: An animal that is considered holy to
the deity and their followers.
Sacred Colors: The colors favored by the deity and
typically worn in the raiment of their followers.
Divine Ability: This section lists the two ability boosts
the deity grants as options for characters with the raised
in belief background (page 9).

10

19092587

4121765

4121765


GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

19092588

19092588

4121765

Alternate Domains: If the deity offers additional
domains, they are listed here (see page 7 for information
on alternate domains). If the deity does not offer alternate
domains, this section is omitted.

Other Deities
Starting on page 52, this chapter also provides details
on 20 additional deities who are important in their
own right, including their statistics and the mechanical
information required to play a champion, cleric, or other
worshipper of that deity. Each god’s stat block presents
information useful for understanding that deity and lists
the benefits worshippers receive from the avatar spell.
These statistics use the following format.
Name: The deity’s name plus a common title or epithet.
Areas of Concern: The topics that the deity cares most
deeply about.
Alignment: The deity’s alignment. In parentheses,
the entry lists other character alignments that this
deity accepts from worshippers. For instance, Kazutal,
the goddess of protection and community, accepts any
good-aligned clerics. Arazni, who is embittered and
prone to cruelty, nonetheless has some sympathy for
victims of abuse and accepts evil, neutral, and good
worshippers, since she is less concerned about her
worshippers’ morality.
Divine Font: This entry presents whether the deity
grants worshippers heal or harm, or can grant both. Heal

heals the living and harms undead, while harm harms the
living and heals undead. Usually, good deities channel
heal, evil deities channel harm, and neutral deities can
channel harm or heal, but there are exceptions.
Divine Ability: This section lists the two ability boosts
the deity grants as options for characters with the raised
in belief background (page 9).
Divine Skill: This section lists a skill that is especially
associated with this deity, which their followers would
naturally be good at due to their worship or association
with this deity.
Domains: The domains that best represent this deity.
Alternate Domains: If the deity offers additional
domains (see page 7 for information on alternate
domains), they are listed here. If the deity doesn’t offer
alternate domains, this section is omitted.
Cleric Spells: Each deity provides at least three
additional spells to the spell list of clerics who worship
them. Typically these are a 1st-level spell and two other
thematically appropriate spells.
Edicts: These are things that the deity urges their
followers to do. Followers must adhere to these as closely
as possible if they wish to gain favor with this deity.
Anathema: These are things that are absolutely
abhorrent to the deity; committing these acts will likely
earn a follower disfavor or punishment.
Favored Weapon: The deity’s favored weapon. See
page 9 for details.

11

19092588

4121766

4121766


Abadar
Master of the First Vault
LN god of cities, law, merchants, and wealth
Realm Aktun (Axis)
Allies Asmodeus, Brigh, Erastil, Iomedae, Irori, Shelyn, Shizuru, Torag
Enemies Besmara, Lamashtu, Norgorber, Rovagug
Temples banks, cathedrals, courthouses
Worshippers architects, bankers, lawmakers
Sacred Animal monkey
Sacred Colors gold and silver
Divine Ability Constitution or Intelligence
Alternate Domains duty
Abadar is worshipped as the god of cities, law, merchants, and wealth. Abadar’s
cathedral-banks are found in many cities and places where order thrives or is
gaining a foothold. Aristocrats, city guards, merchants, and those working in
legal practice or who have the well-being of their community on their mind
are common worshippers of the god of cities, along with dwarves in general.
Abadaran priests living in cities often serve as judges, lawyers, and clerks,
while those who live on the frontier work as roving magistrates, acting as
judge, jury, and executioners in the name of order.
Abadar is the keeper of the First Vault, a divine trove that
holds the perfect version of every type of creature and object.
The Vault is home to the perfect longsword, the perfect shield,
the perfect songbird, the perfect hammer, and even a perfect law.
His followers do their best to emulate these perfect forms in their
own way, whether through crafting a work of art, raising
strong and healthy livestock, or passing laws that best serve
the people in a community.
The holy book of Abadar’s worshippers, The Order
of Numbers, commands his followers to build cities and
settlements where there are none, to work hard and trade in
pursuit of wealth, and to follow the law while doing so. If a
profession is a lawful part of society, it is ordained by Abadar. As
such, those who work at the behest of government often pay homage to
Abadar, as do others who directly benefit from the rule of law and trade.
Naturally, those who oppose the law or actively work against it—such as
thieves, criminals, bandits, and pirates—are enemies of the church and
society as Abadar sees it. Despite this, some heretical factions of Abadar’s
worshippers twist the words of The Order of Numbers for their own
purposes to pursue wealth over all. They justify their criminal behavior
with the holy words of order and wealth while subverting the rule of law on
technicalities, undermining law‑abiding institutions.
As the god of cities and laws, Abadar is a stern but just master. He rewards
those who work hard and looks down on those who would cheat the system
for their own gains. Abadar understands that not everyone gets a fair deal in
the world of mortals, but he encourages his clergy to support laws that are
as equitable as possible, enabling those of lower status to rise. The church
frowns on slavery, believing that trade should always be fair and that no price
offered can ever compensate the entirety of a creature’s life and labor.
Clerics of Abadar labor to help their communities grow and flourish. They
seek to aid in the passage of effective laws and encourage bringing order to
places where it is absent. When ministering to their congregants, clerics
wear robes of white silk with accents of gold that show the wealth of
their church. Temples dedicated to Abadar are fortified, as they often serve
double duty as banks, moneylenders, and currency exchanges. Despite this

19092589

19092589

4121766

12

19092589

4121767

4121767

19092590

19092590


practical purpose, these temples tend to be highly decorated, commonly
featuring elegant architecture adorned with gold and stained-glass windows.
The church of Abadar in Avistan feels it must charge for its divine services
in tribute to the god of merchants, but his servants seek to handle matters of
public health and safety quickly, and without requiring payment. Priests are
also encouraged to strike out on business ventures as a holy duty to enrich
the church. These holy ventures often put members of an individual church
and those of neighboring churches in competition. Such competition is seen
as healthy and often encouraged; however, church law forbids clergy from
harming one another, including during warfare on behalf of opposed nations
or kingdoms. As a result, Abadarans often act as a neutral negotiators between
warring nations—for a fee, of course.
Through The Order of Numbers, Abadar teaches his clergy that following
the law leads to wealth and comfort, and thus happiness. He teaches that
discipline leads to keen judgment, which in turn leads to favorable deals,
whether they relate to commerce, law, or other types of negotiations. While
Abadar encourages the expansion of ordered society, he rejects hasty action
and advises caution in all things. Abadaran clergy pass these tenets on to
their congregations, teaching the layfolk about trade and commerce as a
system for happiness. These teachings also impart the ideals of fairness and
following the spirit of the law, while still respecting the letter thereof. One
of the church’s most important lessons is the value of cooperation between
citizens, as community is paramount to the health of a town and kingdom.
However, they also recognize that self-interest is most individuals’ strongest
motivation to increase their own standing and wealth.

DIVINE INTERCESSION
Abadar’s gifts take the form of riches, while his ire tends to cause offenders
to lose wealth.
Minor Boon: Abadar warns his favored against those who might unfairly
take advantage. Once, when someone rolls a success on a Deception check
to Lie maliciously to you and you alone, they get a critical failure instead.
Abadar typically chooses to grant this boon in response to an extremely
consequential lie.
Moderate Boon: Abadar blesses all your enterprises, leading to financial
success as all your ventures always seems to work out. If you roll a critical
failure at a check to Earn Income, you get a failure instead. If you roll a success
on a check to Earn Income, you earn twice the usual amount of income.
Major Boon: Your silver tongue is infallible, allowing you to reach a
compromise if one is even remotely possible. Once per day, you know just
what to offer to make a deal or broker a negotiation, and if you offer your
divinely inspired deal, you can automatically receive a result of 20 + your
Diplomacy modifier on your Diplomacy check instead of rolling. This
does not increase your degree of success like rolling a 20 would. If there is
legitimately nothing you could offer to reach an agreement, you learn that,
and you don’t expend your daily use of the boon.
Minor Curse: Any time you steal, illegally harm or kill another creature,
or undermine a law-abiding officer or court, a symbol or word describing
your crime appears on a visible spot on your skin. This symbol cannot be
removed or hidden with makeup (though it can be covered with clothing)
and it doesn’t vanish until you make legal restitution for the crime, such as by
serving your sentence.
Moderate Curse: Abadar curses all your enterprises, leading to financial
disaster as all your ventures always seem to fail. The result of your check to
Earn Income is always one degree of success worse than the one you rolled.
Major Curse: You become honest to a fault. You constantly suffer the
critical failure effect of zone of truth. Additionally, you are always offered the
worst possible option in a bargain.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

Aphorisms
When a mortal wishes to gain the
attention of the Master of Vaults, they
utter certain phrases.
By Abadar’s gaze, the deal is sealed:
When a negotiation is agreed upon
and finalized, the initiating party
often utters this phrase to indicate
negations are over. This is often
shortened to just “By Abadar’s gaze”
or “The deal is sealed.” Attempts
to alter the deal after the phrase is
spoken are generally frowned upon.
From Abadar’s Vault: This
phrase describes a product of high
quality, but it’s usually considered
hyperbole. Conversely, saying
something is not worthy of Abadar’s
Vault usually implies functional but
mediocre crafting.
So it is judged: This is a standard
conclusion to official legal verdicts
or other court proceedings. Some
followers use this phrase when
seemingly random events work in
favor of what they believe is justice.

4121767

13

19092590

4121768

4121768


Asmodeus
The Prince of Darkness
LE god of contracts, pride, slavery, and tyranny
Realm Nessus (Hell)
Allies Abadar
Enemies Besmara, Cayden Cailean, Grandmother Spider, Iomedae, Irori, Lamashtu,
Rovagug, Sarenrae, Shelyn
Relationships Ihys (deceased brother)
Temples dark temples near government buildings
Worshippers diabolists, lawyers, slavers, those who seek rulership or discipline
Sacred Animal serpent
Sacred Colors black and red
Divine Ability any, though characters who commit themselves to Asmodeus
this way have their souls bound to the Dark Prince for all eternity
Alternate Domains duty, glyph
Asmodeus is the First, the Dark Prince, the lord of darkness
and law, and the ruler of the plane of Hell. If Asmodeus’s own
scriptures are to believed—and they are corroborated by certain
other accounts, like the angel-penned Book of the Damned—he
is one of the oldest beings of the multiverse. These texts claim that
in time before time, in a world not yet created, Asmodeus and his
brother Ihys were among the first gods in existence. During these
unnamed ages, the two gods quarreled over the fate of the souls of
their creations, and Asmodeus slew his brother. Confident that Ihys’s
act of granting mortals free will was folly, Asmodeus made his own
convictions known: that existence is best served by absolute order and
discipline. These claims contradict other popular creation myths, and
both theologians and immortal agents of the gods doubt Asmodeus’s
claims to varying degrees, but while there is no evidence to prove them, they
are also difficult to refute.
Asmodeus can take any form he wishes. His best-known depiction, however,
is the appearance he is given in popular art: an ancient being with striking
red skin and black horns and hooves, surrounded with a pale aura of flames.
He is shown either bearing a long contract scroll and a vicious‑looking
flaming mace, or seated upon a throne ruling over hordes of devils above
the apocalyptic landscape of Hell. Asmodeus is known to be eloquent,
tactful, patient, and incredibly brilliant, but when angered, he is wrathful
and terrifying.
Despite his fiendish depiction and the widespread
knowledge of his disdain for free will, many
mortals worship Asmodeus. Setting aside the
question of good and evil (he most certainly is
evil), Asmodeus is an immensely powerful
divine being—perhaps one of the most
powerful in existence. He represents
strict discipline, as he was a being
of order long before the concepts of
right and wrong were created. This
representation of Asmodeus as a
champion of law means that
his worship is not limited to
cults and hushed whispers.
Even though it is heavily
frowned upon in most areas of the
world, his worship is nevertheless

19092591

19092591

4121768

14

19092591

4121769

4121769

19092592

19092592


widespread and occasionally, in cases like the nation of Cheliax, the primary
religion of a region.
Servitors of Asmodeus include power-hungry priests, diabolists, lawyers,
and the decadent nobility of Hell-bound regions like Cheliax. These
followers find the inherent structure of Hell a virtue and even seek to
emulate it through clever use of the law. Making use of such order
allows followers to vie for higher positions of power, usually by
taking advantage of complicated bureaucracies. This is a skill that
most Asmodeans share, as the church’s holy text, the Asmodean
Monograph, is itself a tome with several supplemental volumes
and appendices that together require a deep understanding to even
navigate, much less exploit. Asmodeans are careful in their pursuit
of power, however, as a quick ascension or an overextension can leave
one vulnerable to those intent on finding weakness.
Beyond his clerics and priests, Asmodeus has hold over several other
types of worshippers. Soldiers and other martially minded individuals
might welcome Asmodeus’s gifts and the dogma of force and dominance
required to wield them, but regardless of their role, anyone seeking great
power or wealth likely finds themself facing the Dark Prince’s temptations.
These might take the form of a local Asmodean priest offering such gifts
through questionable yet technically legal means. Other times, devils
appear to offer literal infernal contracts accepting the signer’s soul in
exchange for greater abilities, such as spellcasting or the ability to summon
that devil.
Temples of Asmodeus vary greatly from region to region, depending on the
faith’s reception. Public temples to the Dark Prince typically feature gothic or
baroque architecture. In Cheliax, his temples sometimes double as government
buildings or share space with such structures. Inside, bureaucrats, judges, and
other government workers use their understanding of contracts and laws to
maintain the infernal machine of order. In places less open to worship of
Asmodeus, his temples may be secret sites, such as hidden shrines in personal
homes or concealed temples accessible only via secret doors and halls.

DIVINE INTERCESSION
Asmodeus tends to offer his gifts to entice those on the precipice of yielding
to his vile temptations. His curses come most often in response to those who
break contracts in his name, or commit other personal insults.
Minor Boon: Pleased by your talent for manipulation, Asmodeus amplifies
your skills. Once, when you fail at the Diplomacy check to make a significant
or consequential Request, you can cast suggestion on the target of your
Request, suggesting the same course of action. This is a divine innate spell.
Moderate Boon: Your eyes glow red like embers and your skin takes on a
crimson tone. You gain darkvision and fire resistance 5.
Major Boon: Asmodeus helps enforce your bargains and contracts. When
a creature enters a bargain or contract with you, uncoerced and of its own
free will, it can’t voluntarily violate its side of the bargain as long as you
uphold your side. You can always choose to violate the bargain yourself, but
if you do, the creature is no longer bound to fulfill its part.
Minor Curse: Asmodeus’s flames burn you with great malice. You gain
weakness 5 to fire.
Major Curse: Asmodeus forces your compliance. You can’t voluntarily
back out of an agreement or contract or go back on your word, though you
need follow only the letter of the agreement, not the spirit.
Major Curse: Asmodeus has taken note of the chaos you have wrought.
You receive an ancient wound that feels older than time itself. You become
permanently drained 4, and nothing short of another intercession can
remove the condition. Your wound aches fiercely whenever you perform a
particularly chaotic act, causing you to become sickened 1.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY

Aphorisms
Like other major religions across
Golarion, there are countless curses
or praises among the worshippers of
Asmodeus. Among these however,
some are rumored to be more
powerful than others.
Great is Asmodeus: A declaration
in support and praise of Asmodeus,
proclaimed with pride by his followers
who know of his inevitable rule, or
whispered as a sign of trust from one
cultist to another in places where his
worship is not accepted.
What once was his shall be again:
Asmodean doctrine posits that
the First once ruled over all of the
multiverse, and his faithful maintain
that he will eventually resume that
total rulership. Worshippers repeat
this assertion as validation among
themselves, a call to arms, and a
threat to any who oppose the Dark
Prince’s law.
By his flames!: A passionate cry
for help, and a request for divine
intervention. The more devout
followers of Asmodeus know all too
well the danger of this request, for all
contracts exact a price, and the cost of
Asmodeus’s favor is far higher when
the petitioner is in dire need and has
no room for negotiation.

CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121769

15

19092592

4121770

4121770


Calistria
The Savored Sting
CN goddess of lust, revenge, and trickery
Realm Gardens of Deceit and Delight (Elysium)
Allies Cayden Cailean, Desna, Norgorber, Shelyn
Enemies Rovagug
Relationships Cayden Cailean (intermittent lover)
Temples brothels, churches, hideouts, mansions, taverns
Worshippers elves, hedonists, performers, scorned lovers, thieves
Sacred Animal wasp
Sacred Colors black and yellow
Divine Ability Dexterity or Charisma
As symbolized by the three daggers of her religious symbol, Calistria has
three aspects: lust, revenge, and trickery. Silver-tongued and charming, she is a
master of weaving insults into compliments and laying intricate groundwork
for retribution at its finest. She is a goddess of vengeance, but it would be a
mistake to assume that means she pursues justice. Calistria is fickle, shifting
her loyalties and interests as her whims take her—though she never
forgets a slight, and any who think she has forgiven will surely find it
is only a matter of time before they are targeted by a long-term plot of
revenge to lay them thoroughly low.
Though she is one of several elven deities, Calistria is by far the best
known outside of elven communities, and thus many non-elves view her
as the representative (or even the only) elven goddess. This conclusion
is not entirely unreasonable, as Calistria represents those aspects of the
elven ancestry that many other people see as alluring, intriguing, and
fascinating. Among elves, she embodies characteristics endemic to elven
culture and identity, such as free-spirited pursuit of one’s own path, and
further embodies a truth lost on shorter-lived peoples: the flexibility and
capriciousness of Calistria provides a model for maintaining perspective
and composure over a centuries-long lifespan. As a result, she is closely
associated with the elven people by elves and others alike. Of the elven
deities, she receives by far the most worship from non-elves.
As the goddess’s whims are ever-shifting, her worshippers are also often
somewhat transient. Even among elves, worship of Calistria is usually
intermittent or secondary to faith in another deity. Prayers to Calistria arise
from individuals who find themselves driven by lust, engaged in trickery,
or driven to revenge, and the people offering those prayers may have no
commitment to the faith beyond the prayer offered in that moment. As
followers’ lives lead them in different directions, they move on to other
deities, just as the goddess herself moves from one lover to the next to suit
her shifting interests. This personal freedom is a value held dear by the
goddess and her followers alike, and perhaps one of the most central values
to elven society as a whole. Some of Calistria’s most devoted followers
work to promote this tenet, quietly working to undermine tyrannical
governments, exacting revenge upon slavers and freeing their captives, or
simply demonstrating the benefits of a freedom-driven lifestyle.
Organized worship of Calistria is most common among elves, as befits
an elven deity. Though rumor would suggest all her temples are brothels,
these gathering spaces are often more akin to intellectual salons—albeit
more encouraging and supportive of sexual interaction between attendees
than most equivalent secular institutions. Others function more akin to
a thieves’ guild, providing a place to sow and reap rumors, plot acts of
questionable legality, and perhaps also engage in lust-driven interactions—all
activities suitable to take place behind closed doors.

19092593

19092593

4121770

16

19092593

4121771

4121771

19092594

19092594


Clerics of the goddess endeavor to hold the three aspects of their goddess
in balance, as a lifetime in service to any one can easily become monotonous,
and Calistria abhors her followers becoming overly consumed by a single
pursuit. Champions are sometimes more focused, such as those who dedicate
themselves to fighting slavery, but even these are careful to avoid becoming so
wrapped up in their work that they lose sight of the other aspects of life that
make it worth living.
Special rituals, conducted as needed, include invocations of the goddess’s
blessing when a worshipper begins pursuit of a desired lover, divinations to
determine her approval or disapproval of set courses of revenge, initiation
rites for those who wish to devote themselves to the faith, and birth and
death ceremonies. But Calistria’s faith places little stock in marriage; between
the goddess’s own shifting interests and the mercurial nature of relationships
between long-lived elves, marriage is much less of an institution as it is among
other peoples.
Wasps are iconic to Calistria, as widely recognized as a symbol of the faith
as her formal religious symbol. Like the goddess, a wasp inflicts extreme pain
in retribution for an offense, far beyond what it seems a simple insect ought to
be capable of. Further cementing the similarity is the fact that the wasp seems
to take a perverse pleasure in its attacks, pursuing offenders and stinging
repeatedly. Many followers of Calistria carry yellow-and-black tokens on
their person as a form of homage. Priests are known to cultivate giant wasp
allies and pets, and many Calistrian gathering places harbor swarms of
wasps under the eaves or in similarly sheltered spots. These swarms tend to
ignore worshippers but descend in force upon any interlopers, defending such
locations with even greater spite than expected from a typical wasp.

DIVINE INTERCESSION
Signs of favor or displeasure from the Savored Sting are sometimes subtle and
at other times incontrovertible. Calistria typically grants her boon to those on
the path toward great vengeance and curses those who slight her followers,
particularly if those followers are sex workers, though her fickle heart rarely
commits to any absolute guidelines.
Minor Boon: Calistria smiles on the riskiest deceptions. Once, when you
roll a failure on a check to Lie, you get a critical success instead. Calistria
typically grants this boon for an extremely consequential lie.
Moderate Boon: A foot-long wasp finds and befriends you. It serves you as
a familiar as long as you maintain Calistria’s grace. The wasp always has the
burrower and flier familiar abilities.
Major Boon: Calistria guides you towards vengeance. You always know
the direction and distance towards the nearest creature that has wronged you
and thus far gone unpunished.
Minor Curse: Whenever a new person desires vengeance against you, you
suffer a painful sting and are afflicted with giant wasp venom (Pathfinder
Bestiary 324) at stage 1.
Moderate Curse: People react as though you’re insulting them, even in
normal conversation. Whenever you attempt to Make an Impression, the
outcome is one degree of success worse than the result of your roll. If you
converse with someone over a long enough period of time but don’t attempt
to Make an Impression, you still insult them, and you suffer the effect of a
critical failure to Make an Impression.
Major Curse: You have wronged those unable to obtain revenge for
themselves, and Calistria’s curse grants their revenge its own life. Whenever
another creature imagines vengeance upon you but can’t pursue that vengeance
because you are too powerful, well connected, or otherwise untouchable, a
creature of roughly your level manifests out of their imagination and performs
their desired revenge. Once the revenge is complete or the manifestation is
destroyed, the summoned creature vanishes from existence.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

Aphorisms
The following phrases are used by
followers of Calistria to articulate the
finer points of their deity’s teachings.
Love the food, not the chef: Seeking
an object of desire or revenge can
be sweet, but Calistria loathes the
thought of becoming too consumed by
love, a need for revenge, or any other
single endeavor. This saying warns
followers of the risk of letting a need
for revenge overtake the rest of their
lives, and it reminds them to keep a
degree of emotional distance from the
target of their physical desires.
See to your own wounds first:
When one is wronged, the urge to
retaliate immediately is strong, but
this directive encourages followers to
ensure their own needs are met before
pursuing vengeance. Those needs may
be literal wounds, emotional turmoil,
or carnal desires, and ignoring them
is akin to leaving a wound to fester.
Of course, the saying also leaves little
room for doubt about the steps to be
taken after.

4121771

17

19092594

4121772

4121772


Cayden Cailean
The Accidental God
CG god of ale, bravery, freedom, and wine
Realm Hero’s Heart (Elysium)
Allies Besmara, Calistria, Desna, Milani, Sarenrae, Shelyn, Torag
Enemies Asmodeus, Norgorber
Relationships Calistria (intermittent lover), Iomedae (ascended sister), Kurgess
(divine protégé), Norgorber (ascended brother)
Temples inns, taverns, and orphanages
Worshippers adventurers, bartenders, orphans, rebels
Sacred Animal hound
Sacred Colors silver and tan
Divine Ability Constitution or Charisma
Once a mortal human, Cayden Cailean
is now one the few deities known as the
Ascended. In his mortal years, Cayden
was a sellsword of no small fame, known
for his boisterous manner, skill with a blade,
and fearless resolve. During a particularly rowdy
night of drinking, a series of escalating dares led the
wandering mercenary to attempt the Test of the Starstone.
He emerged from the Starstone Cathedral 3 days later,
laughing, a fully realized god. Divine responsibility did
little to change Cayden’s attitude from what it was in his mortal life.
He continues to crave adventure, drink, and pleasurable company while
abhorring bullies, tyrants, and cowards.
Cayden has no formal churches or structured clergy, but simple shrines to
him appear in almost every tavern and roadside inn. Many of his priests own
such businesses and offer healing to patrons, some of whom may have been
injured during a drunken brawl. While Cayden’s faith is a charitable one,
Caydenites still seek payment for such services—at the very least, the injured
party is expected to purchase a round of drinks for the house. Only in places
where worshippers of the Accidental God are in direct opposition to the local
powers, such as where a rebellion is forming under a tyrant’s nose, is his
church out of the public eye. Caydenites can bring themselves to be
quiet in the face of oppression only for so long, however, and once a
rebellion reaches full bloom, the god’s silver tankard is often proudly
displayed across every bar.
As a mortal, Cayden often found himself at odds with the work he
was hired to perform and abandoned jobs that went against his conscience.
This gave him a reputation for being unreliable among his more unscrupulous
employers, but it garnered significant respect from clients with stronger
morals. Legends tell of him taking contracts to free entire crews of slaves,
undoing the operations of predatory business owners, and other rebellious
deeds for the good of the common folk. His worshippers often involve
themselves in similar matters: safeguarding the freedom and prosperity
of working-class people, overthrowing tyrants, and helping the oppressed
relocate to freer lands. His champions, in particular, embed themselves in
nations with harsh laws and stir up rebellions—often from the back room
of a tavern.
Members of Cayden’s faith also maintain many orphanages in urban areas,
arranging them to receive funding from local pubs and other Cayden-friendly
establishments. Not much is known about Cayden’s childhood as a mortal,
but given his patronage of such houses, many have inferred that he spent at
least some time in an orphanage when he was young. While the children in

19092595

19092595

4121772

18

19092595

4121773

4121773

19092596

19092596


such orphanages are not expressly raised in the faith, most adopt the god’s
teachings when they grow old enough to leave. These individuals often
take the surname Cailean to honor him, adding to the number of
gregarious rebels in the world.
While the consumption of alcohol is central to most of
Cayden’s worship, drinking to excess and dependency on
drink are seen as misuse of the Accidental God’s gifts. Clergy
who develop such an addiction are encouraged by their
community to take a large role in the faith’s other works, such
as maintaining orphanages or supporting rebel efforts, and
those who recover often work to assist others with their own
recovery from alcoholism. Though being the god of alcohol is
a popular aspect of Cayden Cailean, members of his faith often
find personal freedom and rejection of tyranny just as appealing
as a strong drink, and it is not uncommon for teetotalers to number
among Cayden’s followers.
Cayden is not particular about who worships him, so long as they abide
by the simple expectations of freedom, bravery, and enjoying a good drink.
As such, he has followers from almost all ancestries. A good number of his
worshippers are half-orcs, who find the casual tenets and welcoming nature
of the faith to be a good fit for those who have been ostracized from more
stringent communities. His followers are typically good natured, boisterous,
and optimistic. Life simply holds too much to take in for anyone to spend
it gloomy. Many adventurers find Cayden’s tenets to be a natural fit, taking
jobs when they can and bucking cruelty wherever they find it.

DIVINE INTERCESSION
Cayden sometimes hands out his blessings and communicates his ire at
seemingly random opportunities based on his drunken whims. In particular,
Cayden blesses the recently liberated to help secure their freedom. Cayden
is also known to grant particularly trivial and harmless curses to those
who disrupt revelry. These curses typically cause the disruptor to change in
appearance, taking on a comical or farcical look. He is quick to lift these
curses by dawn or for those who give in to the enjoyment of the evening
and join the festivities.
Minor Boon: Cayden Cailean helps you recover from nights of carousing.
While you still get drunk and otherwise experience the effects of alcohol
normally, you are never hung over the next morning.
Moderate Boon: You share some of the bravery Cayden espoused during
his ascension. When you roll a success on a saving throw against a fear
effect, you get a critical success instead. If you have the fighter bravery class
feature, when you roll a critical failure on a save against a fear effect, you
get a failure instead.
Major Boon: An embodiment of freedom, you break fetters with ease. At
the end of each of your turns, you can end one effect that is currently making
you immobilized (including effects that make you immobilized by grabbing
or restraining you) as a free action.
Minor Curse: Individuals who raise Cayden’s passing displeasure awake as
if from a hard night of drinking and find that drink tastes foul.
Moderate Curse: Cayden has afflicted you with cowardice. Whenever you
roll a critical success on a saving throw against a fear effect, you get a success
instead, and each time you roll a failure on a saving throw against a fear
effect, you get a critical failure instead.
Major Curse: Cayden curses you to suffer in the presence of drinking,
making it hard for you to bear entering any tavern. Whenever any creature
drinks alcohol within 100 feet of you, you suffer all negative effects from the
alcohol (but only the alcohol) instead. This doesn’t apply if the creature gains
any special effect from drinking alcohol.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS

Aphorisms
Caydenites are usually not much for
formal and composed speeches. Using
Cayden’s name as a swear, frequently
accompanied by colorfully perverse
language, is common. However, some
sayings are recognized among all his
followers, usually originating from
tavern ballads that were popular
enough to spread through the faith.
I’m great, but not so great as
Cayden Cailean: A means to turn
down challenges or contests that have
gone too far—this phrase traditionally
follows one of the competitors
suggesting another take the Test of
the Starstone. This dare and response
allow both parties to end contests
that have gotten too heated without
shame, usually with the refusing party
buying a round for everyone involved.
May your life be as free as your taps:
A popular line to end a toast or use as
a fond farewell. It expresses Cayden’s
belief that both people and drink
should be unfettered. It is frequently
used as a slogan among rebels.
Sweet barleybrew!: An expression
of amazement, frustration, or a simple
curse. It can be used as easily to
react to something wonderful, like
the taste of a cool ale on a hot day,
or something displeasing, like the
approach of a looming monstrosity.

APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121773

19

19092596

4121774

4121774


Desna
The Song of the Spheres
CG goddess of dreams, luck, stars, and travelers
Realm Cynosure, Sevenfold Cynosure (Elysium)
Allies Calistria, Cayden Cailean, Chaldira, Gozreh, Sarenrae, Shelyn
Enemies Ghlaunder, Lamashtu, Rovagug, Zon-Kuthon
Relationships Kurgess (divine protégé), Sarenrae (lover), Shelyn (lover)
Temples hilltops, observatories,
standing stones, towers
Worshippers astronomers,
dreamers, explorers, gamblers,
travelers
Sacred Animal butterfly
Sacred Colors blue and white
Divine Ability Dexterity or Charisma
Alternate Domains stars, void
The night didn’t know beauty until
Desna came into existence. While the
other gods toiled away to create the
world, she set her sights on the heavens,
placing each star in the sky. After surveying
her artistry, she hung the brightest star high
in the north and made it her home. Her first
gift to mortals was this beacon of hope, a
twinkling sign in the dark sky that they could
turn to when lost or unsure of themselves.
Desna provides safe passage through the
darkness to all, should they choose to follow.
Desna journeys without end, for the wonders
of the universe are endless. She relies on instinct to
guide her, paying no mind to planning or destination.
Her lapsing attention may come off as uncaring
or cold, but Desna simply prefers an untethered,
carefree existence. Her confidence in herself and her
followers frees her from the indulgence of worry. She
knows fate can always be rewritten and encourages
others to embrace all that life has to offer. Desna
wants her followers to take chances, get messy,
and live life to its fullest. Those who follow her
teachings she rewards with a spot of luck—revealing
unseen shortcuts, dangers to be circumvented, and
undiscovered wonders.
Desna is an ancient being, born during the dawn of
time, but her sense of wonder has never faded. Even so,
she is no stranger to hardship, understanding that fate can
be cruel and love can be lost. This only strengthens her resolve. She believes
in good luck, and that people can make their own fortune in life. To Desna,
no one is ever truly lost; they need only find their way back to the path. She
revels in mystery, being herself somewhat of an enigma, but she can always
be found on the side of hope. Light always pierces the darkness, and all
nightmares eventually give way to dreams.
The goddess loves music and live performances. Legends say Desna played
the world’s first song by ringing the stars to celebrate the gods’ completion
of the material world. Her faithful have embraced her love of music and
the arts and are often performers themselves, with many modern songs and

19092597

19092597

4121774

20

19092597

4121775

4121775

19092598

19092598


dances having their roots in Desnan worship. Artists devoted
to Desna have created some of the most famous poems and
ballads on Golarion and often perform in conjunction with
Shelynites. A sizable portion of Desna’s priesthood are bards,
spreading her songs across the world on their travels.
Desna encourages her followers to chase their bliss, find
what impassions them, and explore. She recognizes love in
all its forms and remains committed to her lovers Sarenrae
and Shelyn. She also shares a close relationship with Cayden
Cailean and has no reservations about taking on new lovers.
Desna is protective of those she cares for and does not hesitate
to strike back at any who would hurt or impede those she has
placed under her protection.
When making a rare appearance to mortals, Desna appears as a
beautiful woman with long dark hair and shining stars in her eyes.
Brilliant, colorful patterns of pinks, purples, and blues trail behind her
like a comet’s tail as her majestic butterfly wings fly her through the cosmos.
If she wishes to make her desires known, she imparts wondrous dreams to
her followers, allowing them the rare opportunity to dance among the stars
with her.
There is little sense of authority within the Desnan church, though on
Golarion it is a faith that dates as far back as ancient Azlant. The church
lacks any sort of hierarchy, and priests are valued by the tales of the
journeys they’ve undertaken and the experiences they’ve had rather than
for any seniority. A typical Desnan service is performed almost entirely
in song, with interludes of dance, storytelling, and dream recollection
interspersed throughout.
Most centers of worship for Desna are not ornate temples but instead small,
unattended shrines. These shrines are most commonly found at crossroads,
remote areas of beauty, or the tops of hills where the stars can be viewed
unimpeded. Traveling Desnan priests clean and maintain these shrines as they
encounter them, leaving their signatures behind as a way of marking their
own journey.

DIVINE INTERCESSION
Desna favors those who follow their hearts and whims without bringing
harm to others.
Minor Boon: For those at the end of a journey, Desna gifts a deep sleep.
Once, after you rest, you completely recover all Hit Points, remove all
negative conditions, and become free of any curses or diseases.
Moderate Boon: Desna twists fortune in your favor. Once per day, after
determining the result of a check, you can reroll the check and take the
new result.
Major Boon: Desna bestows you with a swirling cloud of lights that forms
a pair of wondrous butterfly wings. These wings grant you a fly Speed of 40
feet and shine dim light to a range of 20 feet.
Minor Curse: You always seem to lose your way or have strange mishaps
on the road that delay your travel. You (and thus any group that travels with
you) travel at only 3/4 normal exploration Speed, before taking into account
the terrain and other features that might slow you down further.
Moderate Curse: Misfortune follows you in your travels and requires acts
of contrition or benevolence to keep at bay. You must always roll twice and
take the worst result when attempting a check. This is a misfortune effect. You
can express your remorse and ignore this effect for 1d4 rounds by spending
an action, which has the concentrate trait. If you perform a truly selfless act
of compassion, you ignore this effect for 1 day.
Major Curse The stars rebuke you for your ways. You are sickened 4 and
slowed 1 whenever you are exposed to starlight.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS

Aphorisms
Desnans share songs, tales, and
phrases as they travel the world.
These are among some of the more
common shared phrases.
A copper for the song, a copper
for the road: It is customary to pay
a Desnan bard 2 coppers. The first
copper is out of respect for Desna, and
the second is either to acknowledge
the performer’s skill or a plea for the
bard to perform elsewhere.
A star cannot see its place in
the sky: When worshippers doubt
themselves or their path, they are
reminded that a single star cannot
conceive the role it plays in the
harmony of the heavens. Even when
alone, they walk alongside Desna.
Be ready for challenges and
unexpected friends: Worshippers
should train in combat or magic so
they can overcome adverse situations
in their travels.
Learn from what is different:
Desna’s followers should accept others
who espouse friendship, regardless of
ancestry or faith.
You are never lost following
butterflies: Desna’s faithful trust in
their intuition and the signs their
goddess provides them.

APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121775

21

19092598

4121776

4121776


Erastil
Old Deadeye
LG god of family, farming, hunting, and trade
Realm Summerlands (Heaven)
Allies Abadar, Gozreh, Kazutal, Shelyn, Torag
Enemies Urgathoa
Relationships Cernunnos (son), Halcamora (daughter), Jaidi (wife)
Temples wooden longhouses or halls that also double as assembly places for people
in the community
Worshippers farmers, hunters, rangers, settlers, shapeshifters, traders, trappers
Sacred Animal stag
Sacred Colors brown and green
Divine Ability Constitution or Wisdom
Alternate Domains duty
Unlike many other good deities, Erastil does not send his followers out into the
world to fight and crush evil. Eschewing crusades and other ventures that take
his followers away from their homes, Erastil watches over those who devote
their lives to family and community. He is primarily an agricultural deity,
specifically focusing on those aspects of nature that either can be tamed
or are of use to his followers. His domain encompasses the plants and
animals that farmers, hunters, and ranchers deal with in their
everyday lives. While he is a protective deity, Erastil steps in only
when quiet, pastoral lives are threatened. He desires his followers
to live their lives in peace, with no risk of being conscripted into
armies, devoured by monsters, or destroyed by magic.
Family is of vital importance to the Elk Father. He places a
high value on marriage and children, considering caring for a
spouse and family to be one of the most important tasks in life.
Erastil’s communities advocate for the unmarried to wed as soon as
possible, though they never force a marriage for the sake of tying the knot.
Widows and widowers often remarry, especially if they are caring for children.
Erastil frowns upon adultery and anything else that bends or breaks the bonds
of marriage, such as a union built on lies. However, he understands when a
marriage has been sullied by the likes of abuse and supports separation when it
encourages the safety of an individual and community.
Erastil sees building families as a goal for all people. Those who cannot
bear children should still be ready to take in those who need a family, and his
followers encourage those who remain single to act as surrogate parents and
role models for children. He values traditions that build families, even when
they are viewed as quaint by others, but he is willing to accept new traditions
as long as they strengthen families rather than weakening them. The Elk Father
is known to be slow to adapt to change, often trying to fit foreign ideas into a
familiar framework, but he always supports strong relationships rather than
rejecting them—he thus accepts all manner of matrimony and family, so
long as they are supportive of their respective communities.
Erastil is thought by most to have his own family, but he rarely
speaks of them to his followers or involves them directly in his faith.
The Elk Father wishes to avoid worshippers becoming distracted by
their god’s relationships—mortals should view their own families,
whatever their makeup, as sacred, rather than focus on the family
of a god simply because it is divine.
When granting gifts, Erastil prefers practical boons
over flashier miracles. Many believe he is the deity who
originally gifted mortals the bow so they could hunt for
sustenance—but not for pleasure. He teaches farmers how

19092599

19092599

4121776

22

19092599

4121777

4121777

19092600

19092600


to know when to sow and reap; ranchers how to tell when livestock are
sick, lame, or gravid; and both how to heal humans and animals.
His values are those of a slow-paced, pastoral life, one in which his
followers respect and are sustained by the gifts of nature. He also
teaches cooperation, and his priests are often the first to arrive at
a barn-raising or house-building. Their sermons are as likely to
be lessons in how to spot corn blight as anything philosophical.
The vast majority of Erastilian priests are clerics, with a
few druids and the occasional ranger. Champions of Erastil
exist but are far less common than those of Torag or Iomedae.
Although priests of Erastil act as leaders of the faith as the community
requires, they live among the communities they serve and might be established
artisans, farmers, or hunters in their own right. They support the community,
often by providing healing services to livestock as well as people, blessing
crops, and assisting with trade. Priests of Erastil are expected to marry, though
it is not a requirement; many priests see their entire community as their family
and a sacred commitment.
Erastilian worship services are short and to the point, with sacred music
designed to be sung and played while working. His temples, like his priests, serve
multiple duties. In addition to being used for worship, these simple buildings
serve as a general gathering place and a space to engage in crafts that require
a lot of space and a roof. Erastil’s major festival, Archerday, is celebrated with
archery competitions, feasting, and often proposals of marriage.
Erastil generally appears as a tall humanoid man with the head of an elk,
clad in traditional hunter trappings and holding a bow, though he sometimes
instead appears as a trapper of the particular follower’s ancestry. This is
especially common when he makes himself known to children or lost travelers,
to help them remain at ease. All hooved animals are associated with Erastil, and
elk are particularly sacred to his faith—though he still allows hunting of these
creatures, so long they are hunted out of necessity and with respect.
Adventurers rarely worship Erastil, as he tends to attract those who prefer
to stay home and concern themselves with their community and family. Those
who do serve him tend to adventure for the good of their community; they
may attempt to determine the cause of monster attacks on their settlement,
earn money for something the villagers need and can’t build themselves, or
gain knowledge that is of use to their people.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES

Aphorisms
Followers of Erastil share common
wisdom among their villages, and these
sayings hold strong over generations.
Never trust a fool: Erastil’s followers
often includes adventurers in their
definition of fool, but the saying serves
as a reminder not to listen to somebody
known to have silly or dangerous ideas.
Nothing is more satisfying than the
fruits of a day’s labor: This reminder to
work hard and take satisfaction in it,
rather than aspiring to more, is often
used to chastise folk who shirk their
tasks, including children who put play
before work.
The hardest task becomes easy
with a friend: Similar to “many hands
make light work,” this message
suggests that a task that would be
hard or impossible alone is easy to do
with help.

PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121777

DIVINE INTERCESSION
Erastil favors those who commit themselves to their communities and detests
those who disrupt these families.
Minor Boon: Erastil shares in his bounty as long as you work for it. Whenever
you roll a critical failure at a check to Subsist in the wild, you get a failure instead.
Moderate Boon: You share Erastil’s sharp eye, allowing you to use a longbow
in any situation. When you attack with a longbow, you can ignore the longbow’s
volley trait, and longbows have double the normal range increment for you.
Major Boon: You become a friend to the land. You can cast speak with plants
as a divine innate spell. When you are in a healthy natural environment, the
land sustains you without need for food or drink. You can cast the commune
with nature ritual without any secondary casters or secondary checks.
Minor Curse: Erastil curses your table and punishes you for relying on
others’ hard work. Any food you didn’t grow, gather, or otherwise harvest
yourself tastes like ash and leaves you fatigued.
Moderate Curse: Erastil’s beasts take a dislike to you. Animals’ attitudes
toward you are one category worse (friendly instead of helpful, indifferent
instead of friendly, and so on).
Major Curse: Erastil leaves you unable to have children (or otherwise
reproduce or propagate if you do so in a different manner). This curse also
affects your livestock, pets, and crops.

23

19092600

4121778

4121778


Gorum
Our Lord in Iron
CN god of battle, strength, and weapons
Realm Clashing Shore (Elysium)
Allies none
Enemies Achaekek, Norgorber, Urgathoa
Temples armories, battlefields, fortresses
Worshippers half-orcs, mercenaries, smiths, soldiers
Sacred Animal rhinoceros
Sacred Colors gray and red
Divine Ability Strength or Constitution
The clash of steel, the cry of victory, the gasping
denial of death: these are the sound of prayers
to Our Lord in Iron, for to follow Gorum is
to fight. Gorum does not care the reason for
battle—a village’s desperate stand against
raiders is no less worthwhile to him than a
crusader army marching against demons in the
Sarkoris Scar—nor does he choose sides in such
clashes. Good or evil, law or chaos, the reason for
the fight is irrelevant. It is the thrill of battle that
finds his favor, the crucible of struggle in which
victory is there for the taking.
Gorum recognizes the value of strategic warfare and
the need for archery, siege weapons, and stealth, but those hold little
allure for him compared to hand-to-hand combat, the contest of raw,
brute strength against honed, deadly skill. Gorum takes no pleasure in
one-sided fights or the slaughter of innocents; an armored knight drawing
a sword in his name against a helpless peasant might find his blade rust
away. Far more delightful would be the peasant’s seemingly pointless swing
of an iron pot, which might be answered as if it were a spoken prayer and
transformed into a deadly blow.
The god’s followers hold that one is either brave or a coward,
with battle the threshing floor that separates the wheat from the
chaff. Death in battle is an honor. While tactical retreats or even
breaks in fighting to negotiate are tolerable, no greater shame
can befall a person than to flee from combat. Murder and
assassination similarly offer no honor, and Gorum feels
nothing but contempt for those practices, as well as
for Achaekek and Norgorber, who condone them. The
god and his followers likewise look on Urgathoa
with disdain, as her diseases steal lives in the sickbed
while the gluttony she promotes destroys warriors’ fitness
for meaningful battle.
Gorum’s followers are innumerable: soldiers,
mercenaries, knights, and raiders across the
Inner Sea region offer him tribute, especially in
places where battle is an everyday way of life, such
as Belkzen, the Lands of the Linnorm Kings, the
Realm of the Mammoth Lords, and the Gravelands.
Believers claim that the god’s spirit lives in iron and
gird themselves in metal armor whenever possible.
They fight frequently, though not always, to the
death—battle can establish dominance, relieve
tension, or even just serve as prayer.

19092601

19092601

4121778

24

19092601

4121779

4121779

19092602

19092602


His priests are hard to differentiate from his other followers. They
commonly wear armor (or heavy robes that incorporate metal) as their
vestments and are adorned with all manner of weapons, making them
walking arsenals ready to draw steel at the slightest opportunity. Though
Gorum has no sacred text, his followers learn the church’s creed from a
collection of seven heroic poems called the Gorumskagat. Each verse keeps
to a rhythm that remains the same across all translations, which warriors
learn to recognize and chant while on the march. These chants harmonize
into the haunting sound of a roaring battle, and Gorumite warbands take
great pride in chants that suggest great conflicts. Battle is the true
language of Gorum, acting as the great unifier, and it
differs little whether fought by those speaking Shoanti
or Dwarven.
Gorum’s clerics preach that should all battle ever end,
Gorum would abandon Golarion, only to return when
mortals inevitably clash again. His most holy sites are
battlefields, consecrated by the struggles, blood, and
lives of those fighting on them. His temples resemble
fortresses, complete with armories and forges—even those
in the midst of peaceful cities. They contain images of the
god, often pictured as a suit of spiked plate armor with
burning red eyes. Shrines to him are simple: a pile of stones capped
with a metal helm or a blade jammed into a crevice.
Among adventurers, most Gorumites are humans or half-orcs, though
followers can be found among all ancestries. They are valued companions
thanks to their skill at defeating foes, even though violence tends to be
their first answer to every problem. They typically set out not in search of
great treasures but rather to find challenges, test their mettle, and honor
their god in glorious combat. The most fortunate prove themselves by
emerging from battle victorious time and time again, but even these are
more likely to be slain on the battlefield than to retire and fade away into
old age.

DIVINE INTERCESSION
Gorum views things very simply: one either fights and earns his favor, or one
is a coward and receives only scorn.
Minor Boon: Gorum grants you a weapon whenever you need one. You
can use an Interact action to draw a 0-level non-magical iron weapon, even
if you have no weapons on your person. Such a weapon lasts only as long as
you continue using it to attack, and it can’t be sold, given away, melted for
scrap iron, or the like.
Moderate Boon: Your blows become unstoppable, carrying the momentum
of Gorum’s thrill for battle. Your greatsword Strikes gain the forceful trait.
Major Boon: Gorum feeds you the zeal of his undying warriors, allowing
you to draw upon your own life force to fight on and on without falling.
Whenever you would be reduced to 0 Hit Points, you are instead healed
to half your maximum Hit Points and become doomed 1 (or increase your
doomed condition by 1).
Minor Curse: Gorum rewards cowardice with frailty. Any armor you wear
and shield you wield reduces its item bonus to AC by 2 (minimum 0) and its
Hardness, Hit Points, and Break Threshold by half.
Moderate Curse: You’ve lost the glory of slaying a worthy opponent. All of
your weapon and unarmed attacks decrease their damage dice by one step,
and all your attacks are nonlethal.
Major Curse: You are unable to keep up with the rigors of combat. The
moment a combat breaks out, you become fatigued and slowed 1. At the end
of each of your turns, your slowed condition increases by 1. These conditions
end only when you are no longer in combat.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

Aphorisms
With worship of Gorum widespread
across the Inner Sea region, these
common sayings can be heard in many
languages and cultures.
Blood, not rust: Gorum believes
a warrior should keep her armor
clean, but if it must be dirty, better
with an enemy’s blood—or even the
wearer’s—than rust. This phrase
encapsulates the idea that something
that may not seem perfect can still
be acceptable. Some devotees of the
god instead interpret this phrase as a
call to action, especially in the face of
hopeless odds, believing it is far better
to risk death in battle than to simply
rot into old age.
Iron-tongued: This descriptor—kin
to silver-tongued and acid-tongued—is
used to describe people who always
manage to say the right thing to start
a fight, though few openly connect the
phrase to Our Lord in Iron.

4121779

25

19092602

4121780

4121780


Gozreh
The Wind and the Waves
N god of nature, the sea, and weather
Realm nomadic (Material Plane)
Allies Besmara, Desna, Erastil
Enemies Nethys, Rovagug, Urgathoa
Temples areas of great natural beauty, lighthouses, mills, shorelines
Worshippers druids, explorers, fishers, hermits, survivalists
Sacred Animal all
Sacred Colors blue and green
Divine Ability Constitution or Wisdom
Alternate Domain cold, lightning
A timeless entity birthed from the first wind to stir the vast
oceans, Gozreh wanders the world in the air and the seas. Sailors
drop boxes of cargo as offerings to avoid a fatal storm, hoping
to please the Wind and the Waves, even though they know that
such pleas are far more likely to go unnoticed as they are to
draw their deity’s attention. The deity’s temperament is fickle
and their fury swift, hurling bolts of lightning and dragging to
the crushing depths those who dare befoul the natural world.
Gozreh is the sea that encapsulates the land and the wind
that moves its surface, the birds that traverse the sky and
the clouds that shield them.
Gozreh is a deity of two aspects, depicted in art as
one, the other, or both, depending on where the piece is
featured. When coming from the ocean, she is shown
as a woman with hair made of sea-foam rising
waist-high from the waves. Over land and from
the sky, he is drawn as an old man with a long
beard, flecked black and gray by storm clouds
with eyes of lightning. When depicted together,
such as along shorelines, the two are portrayed
reaching towards each other, their fingers separated by the
smallest of margins. Yet these aspects are not separate:
they represent the Wind and the Waves, but the deity is
both of them and also neither, for they transcend the
mortal concepts of gender and body.
Much like the winds and seas, Gozreh is
temperamental and prone to sudden outbursts of
wrath. They see all, flitting from the north breeze to
the eyes of a starling to the roots of a mighty oak on
the other side of the world. Those who pollute nature
or destroy the unspoiled wilds might feel a sudden storm
of Gozreh’s wrath descending upon them, but such fits are
unpredictable and indiscriminate, sometimes striking years
later and upturning the lives of nearby innocents with no tie
to the original trespass. While Gozreh is volatile, they are not
malicious. Their rage ceases as quickly as it begins, leaving the
sky and waters calm again. The Wind and the Waves sees and feels
everything at once, and they do not have the luxury of remaining
focused on a single act of desecration for long.
Gozreh is a worldly deity, their interest focused on the weather and
living things. Land has little meaning to them, save that the soil gives
foundation to trees and fire clears the way for new life. Such things are
not reviled by Gozreh’s faith; they are simply considered unimportant on

19092603

19092603

4121780

26

19092603

4121781

4121781

19092604

19092604


their own. Creatures likewise exist and then they fade, ceding their energy
to what comes after. The Wind and the Waves cares more for the wilds,
unspoiled by mortals and free to ebb and flow as it sees fit.
Gozreh’s clergy and followers represent a wide variety of gender
identities. The deity’s dual nature resonates with these worshippers, and
the faith accepts all identities as part of the natural order. The church
doesn’t place an emphasis on marriage in particular, and seasonal
trysts are equally as common among worshippers as unions that last
for life. Members of some of the more secluded sects of the faith
remain celibate and isolated, residing in the most remote mountains
or shoreline caves and reflecting on Gozreh’s independence from
relationships—after all, as a deity of dual natures, Gozreh is never
truly alone.
Most of Gozreh’s followers wear their hair long—sometimes all
the way to the ground—and weave seaweed, coral, or shells into it in
intricate patterns. Clergy who can do so grow their beards long, often
braiding them into tangled tresses. It is not uncommon for Gozran
priests to grow their beards or hair to provide nesting material for
small, local creatures, matting their hair over several months before
cutting this hair to create small nests. Only the occasional priest houses
small birds, frogs, or rodents in their hair while it is still attached.
The most devout members of Gozreh’s faith stay as far from civilization
as possible, living deep in the woods or on barren coastal shores. Those
who are more sociable often take positions on ships, where they serve
as navigators and are seen as good luck charms who can help the ships
avoid the fiercest of storms. These “gale-speakers” come ashore only to
change to another vessel and are highly sought after by ship captains.
Gale-speakers are not bought, however, choosing their own journeys
and favoring vessels with far-flung destinations, waters rarely touched
by anything but the Wind and the Waves.

DIVINE INTERCESSION
Gozreh is pleased when their creatures and waterways are treated with
respect but quick to show their displeasure.
Minor Blessing: Gozreh grants their guidance while at sea. You are under
the constant effects of know direction and become trained in Sailing Lore (or
another Lore skill if you are already trained in Sailing Lore).
Moderate Blessing: You gain the touch of the sea. You can breathe
underwater and gain a swim Speed equal to your land Speed.
Major Blessing: Gozreh has blessed you with their wind in your stride. You
gain a +30-foot status bonus to your Speeds, and you gain a fly Speed equal
to your land Speed.
Minor Curse: Lightning begins to strike twice. You gain weakness 5 to
electricity, and any natural or magical bolts of lightning always target you
rather than the other creatures around you.
Moderate Curse: The current of the waves constantly fights against you,
putting you at risk of drowning any time you must Swim. You lose any swim
Speed you have, unless it’s your only Speed, in which case you take a –20-foot
status penalty to your swim Speed. When you roll an Athletics check to Swim,
you always use the outcome for one degree of success worse than the result
of your roll.
Major Curse: Those who displease Gozreh are shunned by nature itself.
All animals and nonsapient plant creatures are hostile to you, and any animal
companion or familiar abandons you. Sapient plants’ attitude toward you
begins two categories worse than normal, as something about you seems
repugnant to them. While plants and animals might not attack you outright
if it’s not normally in their nature to do so when they are hostile, dogs growl
at you, cats hiss, and so on.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121781

Aphorisms
Adherents of Gozreh typically speak
with a bluntness that belies their
shrewd insight. Most followers
prefer acting over speaking, and
axioms vary from temple to temple.
Common phrases often consist of
simple statements used for giving
everyday wisdom.
The storm also passes: As dark
as the skies can turn, weather and
emotion are both temporary. Life
continues, event after event, and
while lasting impressions are made,
the clouds will eventually clear.
Followers of Gozreh use this as a
mantra or calming advice for those
who come to them in despair.
By the tide and the tempest:
Worshippers speak these words to
seal solemn oaths, making a promise
to both of their deity’s aspects. This
aphorism is used when swearing in
a new acolyte, offering a sacrifice to
Gozreh, or threatening retribution for
a trespass against nature.

27

19092604

4121782

4121782


Iomedae
The Inheritor
LG goddess of honor, justice, rulership, and valor
Realm Swordhome (Heaven)
Allies Abadar, Sarenrae, Shizuru, Torag
Enemies Asmodeus, Norgorber, Lamashtu
Relationships Arazni (former patron deity), Cayden Cailean (ascended brother),
Norgorber (ascended brother)
Temples castles, cathedrals, large and immaculately kept buildings
Worshippers aristocrats, crusaders, judges, knights, rulers, soldiers
Sacred Animal lion
Sacred Colors red and white
Divine Ability Strength or Constitution
Alternate Domains duty
Iomedae, the youngest among the prominent deities of the Inner Sea region, had
already proven herself worthy of divinity before her ascension. Born
in Cheliax, she followed the path of the sword and fought evil,
eventually becoming a paladin of Aroden’s herald Arazni. She
became a legend among the Shining Crusade, leading the
Knights of Ozem in a series of victories over the Whispering
Tyrant. Iomedae became the third known mortal to
pass the Test of the Starstone when she ascended to
divinity in 3832 ar. As Arazni had been slain during
the Shining Crusade, Aroden elevated the newly
ascended goddess to be his new herald. When
Aroden himself died, Iomedae inherited most
of his worshippers and became a major
deity of honor and justice.
Iomedae’s followers heed her call to
take up arms against evil and fight
wickedness for the majority of their
lives. This may take the form of
physical combat against the likes
of fiends, undead, and other sinister creatures, but devotion to the
Inheritor also manifests as individuals fighting against adversity,
oppression, or injustice through their own personal methods.
Wherever courage, righteousness, and valor are needed, Iomedae’s
followers thrive. Iomedae is popular among lawful good adventurers,
and those who worship her sometimes show their faith by wearing a
thin white chasuble over their normal adventuring gear.
The Inheritor does not see herself as deity of war, but she places
great value on prowess at arms and is patron to many military
orders, and her saints are known for their combat skill. As the
only woman who has ascended to divinity through the Test of
the Starstone, she offers a haven for women fleeing from cruel
partners, slave masters, and other oppressors. Many of these
women grow to become skilled knights in their own right or earn
positions of great influence within her church.
Iomedae’s favored weapon is the longsword, and while it is not
required of them, many of her priests and champions refuse to
use any other weapon. In fact, swords are so important to her
faith that they are engraved on the wedding rings of the faithful,
and the dead are buried with small sword tokens or even just a
scrap of paper marked with a sword. They eschew the practice
of burying an actual sword with the dead, however; swords are

19092605

19092605

4121782

28

19092605

4121783

4121783

19092606

19092606


instead passed down to a family member or a student who has need of
them, or are donated to a temple for use by priests and holy knights.
The only exception is when a sword has become damaged beyond
repair or where magic or some other influence keeps the sword tied
to its wielder. Even in these cases, such swords have a habit of turning
up in moments of great need, as if Iomedae herself charged it with
continuing its duties. Armor is of similar importance to Iomedaeans,
and they are rarely buried in their armor. Many bequeath suits of armor
to loved ones so they can continue to serve Iomedae’s cause.
Priests of Iomedae often travel, usually with a circle: a group of 10
to 50 individuals under the charge of a sword knight. Many priests
serve on the front lines of battle, directly combating evils themselves
or aiding others who share their cause. Priests in cities keep their ears
tuned for crime and work to stamp it out. Those who can’t endure the
rigors of battle or choose a more peaceful path often work in courtrooms,
serve as advisors to nobles and local leaders, or train the next generation of
crusaders. Iomedae’s churches are rarely staffed directly by champions, clerics,
or priests, as most prefer to remain active in their work. Instead, layfolk and
acolytes serve at most churches within cities, though some crusaders become
the wards of shrines and temples in more remote regions.
Iomedae’s holy days include Ascendance Day, which marks the day she
passed the Test of the Starstone; Inheritor’s Ascendance, which marks the
day she became Aroden’s herald; the Day of the Inheritor, which marks
her assumption of Aroden’s mantle; Remembrance Moon, a holiday
commemorating the fallen in the Shining Crusade against the Whispering
Tyrant; and Armasse, an ancient festival that includes jousts, duels, and other
tests of arms. She also upholds the day of Mourningfell, where those who
remember Arazni solemnly mourn her death at Tar-Baphon’s hands. Much
of her faith surrounds a document called the Acts of Iomedae, which details
11 miracles she performed as a mortal paladin. Iomedae manifests as a
resplendent knight in shining armor. As she was born in Cheliax, she appears
as a woman of Taldan ethnicity, fully armed and ready for battle.

DIVINE INTERCESSION
Iomedae grants her blessings to those who show valor in trying times.
Minor Boon: You always present yourself at your best. Your clothing and
person are always clean and unrumpled, the metal of your blade and armor
shining and unblemished. This doesn’t prevent you from being exposed to
diseases and other afflictions via filth, but it protects you as well as if you had
washed thoroughly right away.
Moderate Boon: Your heart beats with a determined valor. Once, Iomedae
ends all negative effects affecting you, unless they are from an artifact, deity, or
similarly powerful source; she also restores all lost Hit Points and replenishes
your spells, Focus Points, and other daily resources.
Major Boon: Iomedae imbues your blade with great power. Longswords
you wield gain the axiomatic, holy, and major striking runes while you hold
them. These property runes count toward the number of runes you can have
on your weapon, and if this would cause your weapon to exceed its limit,
choose which ones to keep each day when you prepare. You gain a +2 status
bonus to attack rolls with longswords.
Minor Curse: Your blade and armor have dulled like lead. Your weapons,
armor, and shields have half their usual Hit Points and Break Threshold.
Moderate Curse: Tactical advantages never seem to work the way you
planned. You can’t receive a circumstance bonus to your attack rolls, and
enemies don’t take any circumstance penalties to their AC against your attacks.
Major Curse: All blades reject your wicked heart. Any weapon you wield
automatically becomes broken after you Strike with it. This curse can’t break
artifacts or similarly powerful weapons.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

Aphorisms
Iomedaeans use a number of
battle cries to inspire valor on the
battlefield, but they also share a
number of phrases to spread the
Inheritor’s wisdom.
A used blade never dulls: The phrase
serves as a reminder to keep one’s
body ready and one’s mind sharp, as
challenges can rise at any moment.
For victory, for the heart: This
prayer refers to striking to the heart
to ensure death. It is often used as a
battle cry, but less warlike followers
might use it at any time they are doing
something which requires accuracy,
such as cutting down a tree.
[Their] cloak turned red: When
Iomedae goes into battle, her cloak
changes from white to red. This
phrase evokes that imagery and
is used in reference to a knight or
priest who embarks on the warpath,
whether by literally entering battle or
more figuratively against threats to
the church, or even simply against an
acolyte who has played a prank.

4121783

29

19092606

4121784

4121784


Irori
Master of Masters
LN god of history, knowledge, and self-perfection
Realm Serene Circle (Axis)
Allies Abadar
Enemies Asmodeus, Norgorber
Relationships Gruhastha (nephew)
Temples dojos, libraries, monasteries
Worshippers hermits, historians, martial artists, monks, scholars
Sacred Animal snail
Sacred Colors blue and white
Divine Ability Intelligence or Wisdom
Alternate Domains change, vigil
Irori exemplifies the concepts of self-perfection. His dogma states that he
was a mortal who gained godhood through achieving a physical and mental
state that surpassed mortal limitations. His followers seek to
emulate their god’s divine state by perfecting themselves
using the words of the Unbinding of Fetters, Irori’s sacred
text. The illuminated pages of the tome detail numerous
physical, spiritual, and mental exercises, as well as methods of
learning and remembering.
In addition to self-perfection, Irori is the god of history and
knowledge, perfectly knowing the universe around him. He
encourages his followers to follow suit and learn all they
can about the world and what lies beyond. Even though
Irori perfected himself, he is also a patient and kind
teacher. He and his clergy allow each student to
learn in a way that fits them by offering a
multitude of practices and methods.
As the Master of Masters, Irori
teaches that a person is composed of a
unified body, mind, and spirit. When one masters
all three aspects of themselves as one, they see the Triune Self. To most
mortals, the body and mind are more easily known than the spirit, so study
begins there. Success gained from mastering the body and mind is then
used to penetrate the secrets of the spirit and attain enlightenment.
The search for perfection leads many followers to the
priesthood, where they wander as solitary monks or dwell
in secluded monasteries in endless practice. Many of these
monasteries are sprawling complexes closed to the
general public. The faithful pray, sleep, exercise, and
study in their seemingly endless quest of perfection and
purity, often taking vows of poverty and silence. Other
temple complexes provide guidance and training to
visitors in exchange for tithes and donations. Some
of Irori’s worshippers instead wander alone, strengthening their connection
to Irori by giving up the distraction of material goods and living in caves,
forests, or even graveyards. These ascetics may go naked or wear rags, and
locals often believe they have mystical abilities. Despite their appearance,
these worshippers are well respected among Iroran faithful.
It is said that enlightened members of Irori’s clergy are so self-aware they
know when the hour of their death approaches. In preparation for this
moment, some faithful ingest a diet of poisonous teas and nuts to perform
self-mummification. This ritual allows them to watch over their monasteries
after death and come to the aid of the faithful if necessary. Others, particularly

19092607

19092607

4121784

30

19092607

4121785

4121785

19092608

19092608


those considered the most devout, seemingly disappear from the mortal
world. These supposedly handpicked individuals are said to “walk with
the Master,” becoming divine servants of Irori.
In addition to a priest’s search for self-perfection, the clergy of Irori still
live and participate in worldly cycles. Monk-priests often act as historians
and chroniclers for a region, and the libraries of Iroran monasteries house
ancient and occult knowledge, making them popular among bards and
sages. Elder clergy take this role to heart, gathering and storing knowledge
for the sake of knowledge. Irori espouses that all knowledge is worth
knowing and cares not for how it is used, except when it would create
a loss of self-control. This seeming indifference to good or evil can put
Irori’s faithful at odds with more dogmatic churches.
When ministering to layfolk, priests of Irori act as guides and shepherds,
nudging worshippers to improve themselves. Some worshippers focus
on one or two aspects of Irori’s teachings and methods to become great
unarmed warriors and gladiators, while others study medicine and
philosophy exclusively. Even others study the history of the world or a
given kingdom or region.
Because of Irori’s perfect nature, his followers tend not to depict him in
art, believing that any depiction of the Master of Masters would pale in
comparison to his actual appearance. Instead they use song and poetry to
praise the indescribable flawlessness of their god. They describe him as a
Vudrani man with dark skin, clad in simple robes and wooden shoes. Long
hair worn in a simple braid sprouts from his otherwise bald head, the braid
often wrapped around his neck as a necklace.

DIVINE INTERCESSION
Irori grants his boons to those making progress on their paths toward
perfection. He avoids bestowing misfortune as punishment, preferring to do
so only to give an individual a challenging obstacle to overcome to help them
progress in their quest for self-perfection.
Minor Boon: Irori grants you great insight and knowledge. Once, when
you roll a failure at a check to Recall Knowledge, you get a critical success
instead. Furthermore, the check loses the secret trait, so you know for sure
that the result was a critical success. Irori typically grants this boon for an
extremely consequential check to Recall Knowledge.
Moderate Boon: Your body rebuilds after adversity, becoming stronger.
You can cast wholeness of body as an occult ki spell. If you didn’t have one
already, you gain a focus pool with 1 Focus Point and are trained in occult
spell attack rolls and spell DCs (Pathfinder Core Rulebook 157 has full
information on what happens when you gain your first ki spell).
Major Boon: You can temporarily ascend to a greater form. You can cast
8th-level righteous might once per day as an occult innate spell. When you do,
your form appears unremarkable, rather than clad in powerful armaments.
Minor Curse: Irori challenges you to seek another path, rather than treat
every problem as a nail just because you have a hammer. If you select a check
for which you have a higher bonus when another method would have been
more appropriate for the situation, such as using Deception to lie through
life because it’s your highest modifier, even if it would be better to reach a
compromise through Diplomacy, you must roll twice and take the lower result.
Moderate Curse: Irori challenges you to adapt to adversity in order to
perfect yourself. You become weighed down as if under heavy weights,
becoming clumsy 2 and encumbered until you accomplish a challenging task
of Irori’s choosing.
Major Curse: Irori makes all living creatures forget your existence. This
can be further compounded by raising Irori’s ire, resulting in your name being
obliterated from all written records. In both cases, memories and writings
rearrange themselves to omit you smoothly, rather than leaving obvious gaps.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

Aphorisms
Irori is attributed with countless
adages. Most of these aphorisms
have to do with self-betterment and
pushing on through adversity.
May Irori forget you: As the god
of history, it’s accepted that Irori
knows all that has transpired. Cursing
someone so that Irori forgets them
implies a wish that they did not exist
and is particularly hurtful among
friends or family. A variant, “May
Irori forget this,” is commonly uttered
after an uncommonly embarrassing or
farcical event.
Remember, so you may light the
way: When a follower of Irori has
knowledge of the past they are better
prepared for the future. This is often
said as a send-off when starting a
journey or as a prompt to delve into
history to solve a current problem.
There is no perfection without
change: Irori teaches that the way to
perfection is through change. Followers
of the Master of Masters say this when
times are difficult as encouragement to
continue despite adversity.

4121785

31

19092608

4121786

4121786


Lamashtu
Mother of Monsters
CE goddess of aberrance, monsters, and nightmares
Realm Kurnugia (the Abyss)
Allies Ghlaunder
Enemies Abadar, Asmodeus, Desna, Iomedae, Rovagug, Sarenrae, Tsukiyo
Relationships Pazuzu (ex-consort)
Temples caverns, ruined buildings, abandoned orphanages
Worshippers gnolls, goblins, monsters, outcasts
Sacred Animal jackal
Sacred Colors red and yellow
Divine Ability Constitution or Strength
Alternate Domains change
For those who revel in the corruption of the pure or who find themselves
spurned and neglected by a world that despises their differences, Lamashtu
offers respite among her grotesque brood. The Mother of Monsters readily
accepts mortals into her fold and has made it her goal to twist mortal life toward
her abhorrent ideals. Her intervention is widely known to inflict corruptions
and terrible nightmares. Ostracized individuals who share her ideals will find
this intervention a boon, while others treat similar events as horrible curses.
Above all else, Lamashtu desires the proliferation, permeation, and dominance
of her children. Her touch upon the mortal world reveals the repugnant flaws
among those considered to be beautiful and moral. She and her
followers seek opportunities to rip the veil of innocence
from every creature and reveal the writhing, heinous
potential in a hypocritical world.
Lamashtu takes the form of a pregnant
woman with scars crossing her swollen
belly. Great black wings protrude from
her back, and her legs contort into
enormous avian talons. A third eye is
vertically set above her jackal snout.
From Kurnugia, her personal
realm in the Abyss, she reigns
as the Queen of Demons and
creator of heinous beasts.
Her children, either burst
from her body or sculpted
from her monstrous mind,
serve as pinnacles of might
among her followers. Her
faithful pursue her ideals to
become or create ever more
vile monsters and spread
her murderous influence
over the mortal realm.
Lamashtu
encourages
her worshippers to embrace
monstrosity and may assist in
this endeavor by granting torturous
nightmares to unlock their minds
to the might and truth she
offers.
Their
corrupted
imaginations fabricate ever
more horrendous images

19092609

19092609

4121786

32

19092609

4121787

4121787

19092610

19092610


for Lamashtu to introduce into reality. Devotees sacrifice the flesh and bone of
conquered beasts and their enemies to provide building material for their mother
to mold new monstrous brethren or to grant the gift of mutation to her faithful.
Child-bearing followers are able to directly imitate some of their goddess’s
abilities. Bearing monstrous children for Lamashtu is regarded as one of the
most sacred acts achievable within her religion. The mental and physical
torment these worshippers experience during their Lamashtan pregnancies
and the gruesome births they endure are sacrifices that earn them great
prestige—should they survive. Worshippers with the durability to survive
several births, and who proudly bear the scars from them, are honored by
other Lamashtans and reign as the utmost authority in the faith.
Lamashtans spread their goddess’s doctrine via a variety of paths. Warriors
protect the brood alongside their monstrous siblings. Healers focus on keeping
followers alive through multiple births and are talented in ensuring wounds
form atrocious scars. Caretakers with the strength to manage the church’s
monstrous children are rewarded with blessings by the goddess to aid
them in their duties. Worshippers of all kinds are likely to venture
into the world as missionaries, recruiting shunned individuals and
forsaken communities to benefit the prosperity of the brood.
When those not among Lamashtu’s faithful feel her presence, it is an
omen of unimaginable misfortune. Communities subjugated by monsters and
demons may find themselves pleading with Lamashtu to spare them from her
children’s wrath. Expectant parents who wake in the night from traumatizing
nightmares fear what horrors their offspring may bring.
Lamashtu’s obsessive creation of new monsters promises to reshape the
mortal world into a sinister menagerie of vile corruptors. Her devotees join
a family of all manner of demons and beasts with the goal to cultivate and
glorify the loathsome. To the world that ostracizes them, Lamashtans offer
this ultimatum: join the brood, or perish under its might.

DIVINE INTERCESSION
Lamashtu rewards kinship with monsters and brutal dominance in combat.
Those who offend her serve the brood as prey or unwilling sacrifices.
Minor Boon: Lamashtu’s touch mutates a part of your body. You gain either
an unarmed Strike that deals 1d6 damage or one that deals 1d4 damage and has
the finesse and agile traits. Whether the attack deals bludgeoning, slashing, or
piercing damage depends on the mutation. If the unarmed Strike replaces a limb,
you can still use the mutated limb for its original functions. Lamashtu chooses the
form and function of your mutation.
Moderate Boon: You spread Lamashtu’s nightmares everywhere you go. You
can cast confusion once per day as an divine innate spell.
Major Boon: Lamashtu uses your body to birth a new monster, regardless of
your gender. Once per day, you can spend 1 minute to birth a monster determined
by the GM, which rips its way from your belly. The monster’s level is up to your
level and it does as it pleases, following Lamashtu’s will, though it doesn’t attack
you unless you have lost her favor. You are drained 3 from the ordeal.
Minor Curse: Horrid visions torment your mind, overlaying reality at
inopportune times. You treat everything around you as if it was concealed.
Moderate Curse: Lamashtu marks you as prey. Any creature with imprecise
or better scent can smell you from 100 × the usual range of their scent and can’t
shake the feeling that you smell like prey, so they might attack you even if they
would normally avoid attacking creatures of your ancestry. This smell doesn’t
magically compel their action, and the scent of prey doesn’t overcome a deeper
bond such as that with an animal companion.
Major Curse: Your dreams are an unending stream of nightmares. You need 16
hours of rest to try to get enough sleep to recover resources in daily preparation
that normally require an 8-hour rest, and even then, you must succeed at a DC 15
flat check to do so, and you are still fatigued on a successful check.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

Aphorisms
Lamashtu’s followers utter phrases
that drip with their mother’s
monstrous wisdom. Others use
phrases to keep her beasts at bay.
It’s another scar on the belly: Also
sometimes stated as “The scars are
the proof,” this saying expresses the
sentiment that your hardest trials can
become your best qualities. This phrase
was brought into new communities by
goblins who abandoned Lamashtan
worship. It spread in popularity for
its seemingly positive message, but
those familiar with its origins are often
nervous about the reference to the
brutal scarring of Lamashtu and her
profane mothers.
Sweet dreams and safe deliveries:
In communities that have suffered a
history of tragic Lamashtan births,
this comforting saying is a popular
way to wish people, especially
expectant parents, a life safe from
Lamashtu’s notice.
The three-eyed gaze sees you (me/
us): Among Lamashtu’s faithful, this
phrase is said ritualistically at the
completion of auspicious deeds, such
as the creation of new monsters. Its
declaration rallies the brood to prove
themselves to their goddess. When
hissed in vicious tones to unaware
victims, it is a vile threat and omen of
impending wrath.

4121787

33

19092610

4121788

4121788


Nethys
The All-Seeing Eye
N god of magic
Realm Ahkanefti (Maelstrom)
Allies none
Enemies none
Temples cathedrals, libraries, towers
Worshippers scholars, scribes, spellcasters, wizards
Sacred Animal zebra
Sacred Colors black and white
Divine Ability Wisdom or Intelligence
Alternate Domains glyph
To some, magic is a powerful weapon. To others, it’s a malleable tool. And
to a few, it’s a source of purpose. With an understanding of spellcasting,
creatures can cause fire to erupt from their hands, call otherworldly beings
to aid them, bewitch the senses, and even bring the dead
back to life. The ability to reshape reality to better suit
one’s needs and desires is a powerful call that most only
dream of being able to answer, and few are ever able to truly
master such might.
One such master was Nethys, who was revered as a
god-king in ancient Osirion. Having sought to unlock
all of the secrets and potential held within the planes
and beyond, Nethys shattered his own mind from the sheer
overload of knowledge to which he was exposed. Witnessing all
of creation, the secrets of the universe, and the vast expanse of what
has been seen and will be seen rent his mind in the same moment he
elevated to the status of a god. Nethys gained unlimited power and the
skill to utilize it, but at the cost of his core self and mental security. This
resulted in a split soul, two sides warring within the same body. One seeks
to destroy the world, to purge it through fire and ruin, and to conquer
all that exists. The other attempts to protect the world, to elevate and
educate, and to release it from its limits.
Those who encounter Nethys typically describe him as unpredictable.
His shifts in mood and outlook, which occur without reason, often make
interactions with him strained. Yet despite the difficulties, he teaches
those who seek him out, regardless of their intent. So long as they strive
to use magic, to explore its limitless potential, they can earn Nethys’
patronage. From the vilest curses to the purest remedies, magic and
its continued use seem to be the only drive Nethys maintains. This
is often reflected in his followers, who may seek to uncover all
they can about the arcane by crafting new uses for existing spells,
or to simplify mundane tasks through magical means. Using magic
whenever possible is an often-practiced tenet of Nethys’s followers.
Some of the more zealous followers take it to the fullest extent, opting
to use magic for doing all their household tasks at once, utilizing only
magical sources of light, or constantly providing themselves with a
light breeze.
Nethys’s worshippers seek to gain greater knowledge and expand upon
their powers. While the majority of his faithful welcome those who seek to
learn and understand magic, a fair portion actively shun those without
the talent or patience for it. Many followers push for others to learn,
often withholding the full answers to questions and offering just enough
information to lead others to seek out the answers themselves and learn from
their own pursuits. Some instead guard their knowledge jealously, hoping

19092611

19092611

4121788

34

19092611

4121789

4121789

19092612

19092612


to ensure their own understanding far outpaces that of others who chase
similar knowledge. It is common for the followers of Nethys
to come off as aloof or indifferent, perhaps even mirroring
the god of magic by attempting to balance the world around
them, allowing disaster that could be prevented while
bringing structure where it is lacking. Most refrain from
politics, instead choosing to take impartial viewpoints that
do not require taking hard stances, though a Nethysian’s
neutral stance makes them perfect advisors for rulers dealing
with magic-related issues.
Standalone temples constructed solely for the worship
of Nethys are rare. Instead, many double as libraries
and studies, and preexisting libraries and colleges often
hold shrines to Nethys within. Most of these temples
are grandiose edifices whose imposing nature suggest
architecture only capable with the aid of magic. In fact,
many of the caretakers of such sites take pride in the unique
spells required in the creation of the more elaborate temples of Nethys. A
few more remote locations hold small shrines to Nethys, often containing
small traveling libraries along with various scraps of research that might
spur those who stop and partake to pursue new knowledge, though
such shrines are particularly rare. These shrines and their libraries are
constructed by followers who actively roam the lands in search of new
secrets. Priests of Nethys commonly wear contrasting colors, often one
light and one dark, or take to painting or tattooing one half of their body
to better represent the duality of the god of magic.

DIVINE INTERCESSION
Nethys is often impartial to his followers and their wishes, so it is rare to gain
a heightened favor from the god of magic. However, blatant disregard and
stifling of magic will certainly earn his ire.
Minor Boon: Nethys casts a powerful spell to help you in a pinch. Once,
Nethys casts a spell 1 level higher than the highest-level spell you can cast. If
you can’t cast spells, Nethys casts a 1st-level spell to help you.
Moderate Boon: Nethys grants you insight into the secrets of magic. Add
one spell from a different tradition of magic to your spell list. You still must
learn it or add it to your repertoire normally.
Major Boon: You are granted supreme magical knowledge and mastery. If
you are a prepared spellcaster, you can switch one of your prepared spells for
another spell you could have prepared in that slot; if you are a spontaneous
spellcaster, you can switch one of the spells in your spell repertoire for another
spell you could have chosen for your repertoire instead. In either case, you
make this switch by using a single action, which has the concentrate trait. (If
you are neither a prepared nor a spontaneous spellcaster, Nethys won’t grant
you his major boon.)
Minor Curse: The secrets of magic become mentally taxing. You are
permanently stupefied 1.
Moderate Curse: Your magic wars against itself like Nethys’s dueling
halves. Whenever you cast a spell, attempt a DC 11 flat check. On a failure,
if your spell was harmful, you instead cast a beneficial spell of the same level
on your intended targets, and if it was beneficial, you instead cast a harmful
spell of the same level on your intended targets. If the spell benefited some
targets and harmed others, you cast a spell of the same level that switches
who benefited (for instance, changing a heal spell that harmed undead and
healed the living to a harm spell that healed undead and harmed the living).
You still lose the spell slot for the spell you were trying to cast.
Major Curse: Nethys severs your connection to magic. You lose all your
spellcasting abilities and cannot gain any future spellcasting.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS

Aphorisms
Nethys’s followers prefer phrases
that require knowledge of magic or
wordplay in order to decipher.
That which is not there, is: This
saying is as cryptic as the god
of magic himself, and those who
understand its intent readily recite
it as they chase new knowledge. It
signifies that just because an idea or
entity is not currently understood or
doesn’t currently exist doesn’t mean
that it can’t be understood, and often
spurs the pursuit of understanding.
That which is not immediately
seen can still be learned from and
uncovered, often granting new insight.
Point with the finger of his
scorched black hand: This reference
to Nethys’s hand, burned black with
magic, has multiple meanings that
become apparent when translated
into other languages. At a base level,
it directs followers toward a challenge
that allows them to learn, while at the
same time warning that the challenge
could be destructive.

APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121789

35

19092612

4121790

4121790


Norgorber
Blackfingers, Father Skinsaw, the Gray
Master, Reaper of Reputation
NE god of greed, murder, poison, and secrets
Realm Duskfathom (Axis)
Allies Achaekek, Sivanah
Enemies Abadar, Cayden Cailean, Erastil, Gruhastha, Iomedae, Sarenrae, Torag
Relationships Cayden Cailean (ascended brother), Iomedae (ascended sister)
Temples alchemy shops, merchant houses, thieves’ guilds
Worshippers assassins, murderers, poisoners, politicians, spies, thieves
Sacred Animal spider
Sacred Colors black and gray
Divine Ability Dexterity or Intelligence
Norgorber is the most mysterious of the Ascended, the group of mortals
who assumed godhood after passing the Test of the Starstone. Unlike
Iomedae’s and Cayden Cailean’s mortal existences, Norgorber’s life
before his ascension is a mystery; the god himself has shrouded
details of his mortal life in secrecy. This is no surprise to those
familiar with Norgorber—he is the master of all secrets, a calculating
manipulator who cleverly and ruthlessly wields the power of hidden
knowledge to achieve his own ends. Only his most trusted worshippers
know enough about his goals to assist in the god’s plans, and even those
worshippers often have their memories modified after their
parts in Norgorber’s schemes are complete.
In artwork, Norgorber is often portrayed merely by
his religious symbol: a black, featureless mask. The god
actively interferes in artists’ attempts to realistically
reproduce his likeness by causing blindness or
tremors to prevent completion of their work.
Those who claim to have seen him can describe
only a nondescript hooded figure in black and
gray, with his face lost in shadows.
Norgorber is worshipped in four aspects, each of which embodies
a facet of the god’s sinister portfolio: Blackfingers, god of poison;
Father Skinsaw, god of murder; the Gray Master, god of thieves; and
the Reaper of Reputation, god of secrets. Norgorber’s followers typically
align themselves with one aspect above the others, though some temples
venerate the god in all of his guises. Temples dedicated to different aspects
of the god operate independently, though they might work together to
accomplish complicated schemes planned by the god or his minions.
Blackfingers: In his aspect as the god of alchemists and poisoners,
Norgorber represents the covert use of dangerous substances to achieve
personal gain and the pursuit of alchemical secrets regardless of the
consequences. Even alchemists who worship more benevolent gods
covet the secrets known by Blackfingers, though his worshippers would
contend that nonbelievers are too cautious or kindhearted to successfully
pursue Norgorber’s forbidden techniques. Followers of Blackfingers are
reckless experimenters, selectively breeding spiders or scorpions to develop
stronger venoms or testing chemical tinctures on prisoners to study
their effects. Their experiments often lead to the development
of useful contraband, such as untraceable poisons that mimic
the effects of disease or powerful acids that eat through locks
or prison bars.
Father Skinsaw: Bloodthirsty and brutally violent,
Norgorber’s Father Skinsaw aspect is worshipped by only the

19092613

19092613

4121790

36

19092613

4121791

4121791


most heartless killers. Whether they’re merciless bandits, cutthroat thieves,
or fearsome butchers, followers of Father Skinsaw focus on
snuffing out life, either as a show of dominance, a gruesome
sacrament, or a celebration of depravity. While senseless killing
is enough for many worshippers of Father Skinsaw, some serial
killers see their crimes as steps in the unknowable plans of their
dark god. For them, every murder is a prayer.
The Gray Master: Blackmail, extortion, larceny, kidnapping—all
of these are sacred to followers of the Gray Master. Norgorber’s
aspect as the god of thieves encourages his followers to seize what
they can get and disregard moral compunctions and the law. While
individual guilds of thieves might follow guidelines that ensure
profitability or help them avoid authorities, those that follow the
Gray Master seek to profit at the expense of others. Of all the
god’s aspects, the Gray Master is the most likely to have organized
cults of followers, and his priests often hold important positions in
thieves’ guilds, gangs, and crime syndicates.
The Reaper of Reputation: Politicians, spymasters, and even
archivists or researchers might worship Norgorber as this, his
least malevolent aspect. The Reaper of Reputation represents the power of
information: the power of discovering it, the power of keeping it secret, and
the power of whispering it in the right ear at the right time. While many good
people are interested in gathering useful information, those who follow the
Reaper of Reputation usually do so to further their own selfish ends and
seek to leverage insider knowledge for personal gain. Price manipulation
and political corruption are the trade of many of the Reaper of Reputation’s
followers, but his most extreme worshippers might ferret out a secret and then
kill anyone who had learned of it, merely to keep its power for themselves.
19092614

19092614

DIVINE INTERCESSION
Norgorber’s favor and displeasure are subtle, yet powerful.
Minor Boon: Norgorber protects your secrets and lies. Once, when you roll
a failure at a Deception check to tell a Lie, you get a critical success instead.
Norgorber typically chooses to grant this boon to protect an extremely
consequential lie.
Moderate Boon: Your poisons are everlasting. If your Strike with a
poisoned weapon critically fails, or succeeds but fails to deal slashing or
piercing damage, the poison is not spent. The poison is still spent once
successfully applied to a creature.
Major Boon: You become a living secret. You are immune to divination
effects and attempts to magically alter your memory, unless you choose to
be affected or those effects come from a deity, artifact, or similarly powerful
source. You also can never be tricked or forced by mundane means into
uttering a secret you wish to keep.
Minor Curse: Norgorber allows thieves to get the better of you. Whenever
you Earn Income, you earn money as if the task were 2 levels lower due to
theft, loss, or bad fortune.
Moderate Curse: Poisons are quick to debilitate you. When you roll a
failure at a Fortitude save against a poison, you get a critical failure instead.
Major Curse: Norgorber steals away your memories. Once each day when
you awake from rest, roll 1d4. On a 1, you forget the events of the previous
day forever. On a 2, you temporarily experience complete retrograde amnesia
for that day, unable to recall information from the past, including who you
are. On a 3, you temporarily forget a single important subject for that day
(Norgorber tends to intentionally chooses a memory to cause distress, such as
making you forget your spouse on your anniversary). On a 4, you temporarily
remember false memories on a single important subject for that day, blended
seamlessly into your true memories.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS

Aphorisms
Many followers of Norgorber
use a mix of key words, double
entendre, and nonverbal signals to
communicate with fellow believers
without attracting the attention of the
uninitiated. The following two sayings,
however, are common among most of
Norgorber’s followers, though they
are careful not to utter them around
nonbelievers.
With one hand I give: Used as a
salutation, this is also a warning—the
speaker’s true motivations remain
secret, and a gift in one hand may be
offset by a threat in the other.
I wait for a fair price: Something of
little apparent value may have great
worth in the right hands or whispered
in the proper ear. A person who says
this possesses some item or knows
some secret that has not yet been
deployed to its full potential.

APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121791

37

19092614

4121792

4121792


Pharasma
Lady of Graves
N goddess of birth, death, fate, prophecy, and time
Realm Boneyard
Allies Alseta, Tsukiyo
Enemies Urgathoa
Temples catacombs, cathedrals, cemeteries, hospitals, libraries, river islands
Worshippers midwives, morticians, physicians, pregnant people, prophets, scholars,
those close to death or engaging in deadly ventures
Sacred Animal whip-poor-wills
Sacred Colors blue and white
Divine Ability Constitution or Wisdom
Alternate Domains souls, time, vigil
No record of history, and not even other gods, can recall a
time before Pharasma. Her throne lies within a vast, gothic
cathedral located on the infinite Spire at the center of the
planes. From here, she looks both forward and backward in
time, observing the births, lives, and deaths of every soul, as
she serves as the final arbiter of a soul’s destination after death.
Psychopomp servants of Pharasma guide and safeguard newly
dead souls along the River of Souls to her realm, where she
judges each soul and ensures it is sent to the proper plane
for its afterlife, according to its alignment and mortal
deeds. Although she can see all possible fates and knows
the fate of each individual, free will and choice can alter
a soul’s final destination, and she places great weight
on the individual’s actions and personal choices.
Therefore, Pharasma withholds her final judgment
until a soul stands before her. Her prophecies are
cryptic, and their full meanings are rarely revealed
until the foretold events occur.
Once Pharasma has judged a soul, it can no longer be
returned from the dead by mortal magics such as raise dead or
resurrect. While it may be within Pharasma’s power
to do so, she has never withheld a soul from its
proper destination—not even from the realms of
gods she may despise. She embraces her role with
a dispassionate dignity that often makes her seem
aloof or uncaring, but in truth she simply understands
the necessity of impartiality to sustain the cycle of life
and balance throughout the planes. Almost all other
deities show Pharasma great deference, for she is the
only one they trust to unfailingly distribute souls to
their proper planes.
Pharasma abhors the creation of undead and magic
that traps souls, preventing them from arriving in her
realm for judgment and disrupting the balance of the
cycle of souls. She commands her followers to destroy all
such abominations and to release any bound souls.
Pharasma is usually portrayed as a tall, ash-skinned
woman with white eyes and wild, flowing, white hair,
cloaked in dark robes and holding an hourglass filled with
red sand. Many dread her as a grim reaper, ready to
take their souls at the end of their mortal existences. Yet
many also worship her as the guardian of birth and new

19092615

19092615

4121792

38

19092615

4121793

4121793

19092616

19092616


souls, a wise scholar, and a healer. These worshippers call her The Mother of
Souls, a title reflecting her protective and guiding nature. Pharasma’s religious
symbol depicts a silver‑and‑blue spiraling comet, which signifies the bright
and winding path of every soul’s potential.
While her faithful most often wear black clothing trimmed in purple
or silver during rituals, they are also fond of wearing brilliant shades of
silver, blue, and purple throughout their daily lives and during sacred rites
celebrating birth and life. Midwives and physicians carry silver religious
symbols of Pharasma on long chains when they go to bless newborn
children or say prayers over the dying. Scholars and oracles embroider
Pharasma’s spiral or an hourglass to represent their belief in fate, prophecy,
or observation of time. Those devout to Pharasma are generally circumspect
when it comes to taking sides in politics or conflicts. Priests of Pharasma can
frequently be found blessing, healing, and tending to the dead on rival sides
of disputes, battles, and even wars with equal efficiency.
Places of worship dedicated to Pharasma range from the simplistic to
the ostentatious. Mausoleums and crypts usually contain at least a token
idol or shrine dedicated to Pharasma. Shrines to her can be as simple as a
carved stone on a river island or within a graveyard. However, Pharasma’s
temples are towering, gothic cathedrals decorated with stained glass and
carved statuary. These temples typically have universities, hospitals, and
immense libraries attached above ground, and vast, deep catacombs intricately
decorated with the bones of the deceased below. Wealthy patrons and scholars
pay membership fees to access knowledge and wisdom within her temples.
Since being interred within the catacombs of Pharasma is deemed a blessing,
they also contribute sizable donations to secure prominent locations for their
bodies’ later interment in the crypts, often as an attempt to gain favor during
Pharasma’s judgment of their soul in the afterlife. It is not uncommon for entire
libraries or estates to be donated to the church of Pharasma from the deathbeds
of the rich and powerful concerned with how their mortal deeds will reflect
upon their immortal soul.

DIVINE INTERCESSION
Those who would prevent a soul from reaching the afterlife draw Pharasma’s
ire, but those who merely dabble in pursuits like lengthening their life or
resurrection are usually ignored, as eventually death comes for all.
Minor Boon: You see a momentary, prophetic glimpse of your fate. Once,
you gain a +2 status bonus to a single check; you can apply this bonus after
you determine the result, and it can potentially change the degree of success.
Moderate Boon: You gain a greater mastery over the energies of life and
death. Your Strikes deal 1 positive damage to undead. Your spells that deal
positive damage to undead gain a +1 status bonus to damage per spell level,
and your spells that heal the living gain a +1 status bonus to the Hit Points
restored per spell level.
Major Boon: Pharasma keeps you alive to fulfill your fate. The GM secretly
chooses a fate Pharasma knows you must fulfill. Until you fulfill this fate,
any time you would die, a grave but nonfatal misfortune instead befalls you.
You take at least a full day to recuperate and you potentially face permanent
consequences, but you don’t die. If you would have died even once without this
boon, once your fate is complete, you let out a final sigh and then die peacefully.
Minor Curse: Horrifying or enticing visions of your final judgment distract
you from the task at hand. You take a –2 status penalty to initiative rolls.
Moderate Curse: Fate turns against you and reveals dire portents. Divinations
such as augury cast by you or that involve you always suggest woe. Once per day
after you attempt a check, the GM can make the result of the roll a natural 1.
Major Curse: Pharasma wills the end of your life and your lineage. You
become unable to have children (or otherwise procreate by any means,
including create spawn abilities) and are permanently doomed 2.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX

Aphorisms

INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

Pharasmins use a great number of
rituals and tokens for their many
ceremonies. Along with these, they
also use numerous phrases, including
the following.
All who live must face her
judgment: This phrase is customarily
uttered when one must make a fated
decision or when warning someone
about their poor behavior.
Not this year, not yet: A brief prayer
spoken to the goddess of death,
asking to delay the inevitable in order
for the speakers to accomplish more in
their lives.
Pharasma’s sands keep running:
This phrase, in reference to the sands
of time continually flowing through
Pharasma’s hourglass, is commonly
spoken when either someone is taking
too long or when one must wait a
long time.
The Lady shall keep it: A solemn
oath to keep a secret by swearing that
only Pharasma shall hear it from the
confidante (and only then after death).

4121793

39

19092616

4121794

4121794


Rovagug
The Rough Beast
CE god of destruction, disaster, and wrath
Realm The Dead Vault
Allies none
Enemies Abadar, Asmodeus, Calistria, Desna, Gozreh, Lamashtu, Pharasma, Sarenrae,
Shelyn, Torag, Zon-Kuthon
Temples caverns, chasms, fortresses, pits
Worshippers destructive zealots, doomsayers, hate-mongers, warlords
Sacred Animal scorpion
Sacred Colors brown and red
Divine Ability Strength or Constitution
Alternate Domains swarm, void
Rovagug has no single holy scripture. He has little use for one, for his sole
commandment is to destroy, and his followers need no instruction in how to
accomplish that. The figurative and literal monsters who worship Rovagug
share their myths and legends in secret shrines and hidden caves, calling him
the Rough Beast, the Imprisoned King, the Tide of Fangs, the Unmaker, and
the Worldbreaker. They tell each other that each life they snuff out, each piece
of art they destroy, each work of labor they bring tumbling down puts a crack
in the prison that holds their god. Each of their little efforts of destruction
adds up and will one day free him, setting him loose to bring about the end
of all things.
They tell of how Rovagug crawled millennia ago from beyond
the depths of the universe, leaving only devastation in his wake.
An endless number of lesser gods fell before him, devoured in
his massive maw or crushed beneath his unholy bulk. His
worshippers whisper in anger of a cowardly alliance of the
other gods, who couldn’t hope to stop him alone: While
sly Calistria distracted the Rough Beast, foul Torag,
weak Gorum, and judgmental Pharasma conspired to
forge an unbreakable prison in the heart of Golarion.
Arrogant Sarenrae had the temerity to challenge
Rovagug directly. She used holy fire to lure him
close to the world that would be his prison
before finally slicing a great rift on the surface
that drew him in. Only then did cowardly, smug
Asmodeus seal Rovagug in the Cage, taunting
him with the Hell-forged key.
Still, his worshippers say, this prison merely contains
Rovagug, and only for now. He sleeps fitfully, his
shudders causing the earth to tremble and mountains to
fall, his cries of rage spewing noxious gases to poison
his enemies’ followers. His flesh births and
sustains horrors undreamed of, parasites
with the power to wreak destruction
above. The deadliest of these—
great spawn such as Festering
Ulunat, the Unholy First;
Chemnosit, the Monarch
Worm; Xotani, the Firebleeder; and Tarrasque, the Armageddon Engine—are
almost gods in their own rights, laying waste to Golarion and leaving nothing
but destruction in their wakes. They have caused catastrophes on a scale most
of the Rough Beast’s followers only dream of, monstrous steps toward setting
Rovagug free to feast on the gods who locked him away.

19092617

19092617

4121794

40

19092617

4121795

4121795

19092618

19092618


While most of Rovagug’s followers simply seek an end
to all, his most extreme worshippers believe they will be
uplifted as gods in a new world Rovagug will create after
destroying the old. In truth, the Rough Beast cares nothing
for them. He cares only about destruction and bringing an
end to all things. Should the day come that his prison fails,
he would, after enacting his vengeance on the other gods,
turn on his own spawn and followers, devouring them as
surely as all else.
Rovagug’s faith is forbidden in civilized lands, where no temple
to him is allowed to stand. The Rough Beast’s worshippers revel
in the hatred of the other gods and their faithful. Creatures who
take up Rovagug’s service live to destroy. Most are monsters or
hail from communities that celebrate destruction; they cry out
paeans to the god as they cut through lesser creatures in howling
fits of rage. A few individuals—all somewhat monstrous in their
own right—follow Rovagug in their lust for the power that
they believe even the other gods fear, or in the mistaken belief
that the obliteration the god promises would clear the way for
a new birth. Even they know enough to not name their deity in the open, however,
lest they be swiftly cut down.
The few adventurers who follow Rovagug cherish destruction, laying waste
to as much as they can. They may be warlords, cultists seeking to open the
locks of Rovagug’s prison, warriors who have seen such horrors that they can
envision only destruction, or vengeful souls who want an end for themselves
and all who have hurt them.

DIVINE INTERCESSION
Rovagug’s imprisonment means he can almost never intercede on Golarion,
but some places lead far enough into the earth that the god’s profane influence
can leak through. He is as likely to curse those who draw his attention as he
is to reward them, though great enough acts of violence and destruction may
earn his favor.
Minor Boon: Your attack becomes more destructive. Once, one of your
failed or successful attacks becomes a critical hit, and your weapon or
unarmed attack gains the deadly d12 trait for this attack, replacing any deadly
trait it already had. Rovagug typically grants this boon when the critical hit
could destroy something precious or significant.
Moderate Boon: You can devour all. You mouth grows into a horrible
circular, insectile maw of needle-like teeth. You gain a bite unarmed attack
that deals 1d8 piercing damage. Additionally, you can stomach eating
anything you can fit down your throat—even rocks or small objects. You gain
a +4 status bonus to saves resulting from eating something, such as diseases,
poisons, or other effects of the ingested object. This doesn’t allow you to
digest magic items that would otherwise be difficult or impossible to destroy,
such as cursed items or artifacts.
Major Boon: You can crack the surface of Golarion, accelerating the release
of the Rough Beast. You gain the Quaking Stomp barbarian feat.
Minor Curse: Whenever you are imprisoned, you thrash and shake as
your mind fills with desperation. Any time you are restrained or otherwise
imprisoned (such as being sent to jail), you are also clumsy 2 and stupefied 2.
Moderate Curse: Your destructive rage seeks to remain unbound.
Any armor you wear automatically becomes broken. Other items in your
possession occasionally become broken over time.
Major Curse: You are useful only as a beacon of destruction. You are
permanently confused, rampaging against anything and everything in
your sight, and you deal an additional 18 damage with your unarmed and
weapon Strikes.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX

Aphorisms
The nature of those who worship
Rovagug means few adages arise
among the faithful beyond frenzied
cheers at a foe’s death or mocking
thanks when a needed object breaks,
but some have made their way into
wider use.
When the Cage crumbles: This
understated threat carries the promise
of eventual death. It speaks to his
followers’ certainty that Rovagug will
break free and spread destruction.
The faithful sometimes use it to learn
whether another shares their beliefs,
hoping for a response of “Gods will die.”
Nothing holds me: Fanatic followers
use this battle cry to indicate their god
is working through them, and thus is
unconstrained by his prison.

INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121795

41

19092618

4121796

4121796


Sarenrae
The Dawnflower
NG goddess of healing, honesty, redemption, and the sun
Realm Everlight (Nirvana)
Allies Cayden Cailean, Desna, Iomedae, Shelyn
Enemies Asmodeus, Lamashtu, Rovagug, Urgathoa
Relationships Desna (lover), Shelyn (lover)
Temples cathedrals, churches, infirmaries, standing stones
Worshippers healers, mediators, philanthropists, the redeemed
Sacred Animal dove
Sacred Colors blue and gold
Divine Ability Constitution or Wisdom
Alternate Domains repose
Sarenrae is one of the most popular deities on Golarion
by virtue of her association with the life-giving sun
and her perpetual offer to help anyone be their
best, even when they have made mistakes.
Most people thank her for her kind work
to channel the sun’s power for everyone’s
safety and livelihood, and thank her clergy
for granting her healing power to all who
need it. Mortals look to the Dawnflower
as an example of boundless love,
exquisite kindness, and true patience.
They pray to her to heal the sick, lift
up the downtrodden, and illuminate
darkness of circumstance as well as
darkness of spirit. Her followers aspire
to emulate her through generosity,
nurturing, truthfulness, and selfless
courage. They oppose evil everywhere
with words first, and when necessary,
with scimitar and flame.
Sarenrae is also much revered as a
symbol of renewed hope, having selflessly
led the charge against Rovagug to save
Golarion from utter destruction in the
mythic past. It was she who cast Rovagug
into his terrible tomb within the world
and set the fire of the sun within his prison
to weaken the Rough Beast and prevent his
escape. She has the aspect of an angel, having
originated as one of the mightiest angels before
establishing herself as a true deity, and she resumes
this aspect of a burning avenger when she encounters
evil too entrenched for even her to redeem it.
Sarenrae’s holy text is The Birth of Light and
Truth. It records her struggles as an angel before mortal
history began and also offers guidance on resisting evils
of convenience, standing against cruelty in the world, and
teaching and redeeming an evil soul. Preachers often publicly
cite the text in passionate sermons when condemning cruelty and
corruption, giving the faithful a reputation as fiery zealots. In places like
Qadira, this puts many of her followers in conflict with those in power who
allow or even support evils like slavery—in recent times, she has stripped her

19092619

19092619

4121796

42

19092619

4121797

4121797


blessings from those among the faith who condoned such evils, though after
the Dawnflower’s temper cooled, she has publicly offered redemption to
disgraced faithful who are willing to repent.
The church of Sarenrae is devoted to healing all ills, nourishing
body and spirit, and correcting evils. It is a flexible, quasi-familial
organization that calls its members to go where they are needed.
Most people recognize Sarenrae’s bright, soaring temples, which
allow services to be performed in direct sunlight. The largest tend to
incorporate Keleshite architecture, as in many areas Sarenrae’s faith
spread ahead of Kelesh’s economic expansion. Sarenite services are
traditionally joyous, with singing and dancing. Milestones in familybuilding and personal growth are especially celebrated, including
adoption, marriages, coming of age, and recognizing a former evildoer
as rehabilitated.
Clergy are called to do many kinds of good in the world. They feed
the hungry, tend the ill, heal the injured, and guide the lost. Many are trained
as diplomats and advisers in the hope of maintaining peace and ensuring that
governments are just and merciful. They also counsel those with torn spirits,
mediate disputes, and rehabilitate those who have wronged others. Although
most day-to-day work of the church is peaceful, its members practice swordplay
and magic both as a form of meditative art and as preparation to strike down
irredeemable evil with merciful speed.
Those who have done great wrongs but feel regret sometimes join Sarenrae’s
church because the goddess offers a chance at redemption even to people who
have committed terrible evils. The reflective and intimate Candlemark holiday
on the winter solstice—celebrating the personal reasons that each individual
follower joined the church—has special significance to these followers, as
well as new practitioners and those in trying times.
19092620

19092620

DIVINE INTERCESSION
Sarenrae often bestows boons for making a sacrifice to do better or taking a
risk to redeem another. She typically curses those who betray her mercy.
Minor Boon: Your healing hands are blessed with a warm flame. Once, when
you heal another creature, instead of healing it for the normal amount, you
heal the creature to full Hit Points, no matter how much damage it has taken.
Sarenrae typically grants this boon in extremely consequential circumstances.
Moderate Boon: Your blade burns the irredeemable. Your attacks deal an
additional 1d6 fire damage that ignores fire resistance.
Major Boon: You are a voice of peace and rehabilitation. When you roll a
success at a check to Request something, you get a critical success instead.
In addition, all creatures other than fiends, undead, and mindless creatures
allow you one chance to speak your piece and make requests before entering
combat. If you or an ally ever use the time from the request to gain an
advantage in an ensuing combat (for example, by casting preparatory spells,
positioning for combat, or waiting out your opponent’s preparatory spells),
Sarenrae immediately revokes this boon, or possibly curses your ally.
Minor Curse: The sun burns you for your transgression. You receive a
sunburn that causes you to become permanently clumsy 1.
Moderate Curse: The sun shines its light on everything you say. You become
unable to tell lies, and if you attempt to do so, you instead compulsively
blurt out the truth on the matter in question. You are still able to withhold
information or lie by omission.
Major Curse: Sarenrae restricts your ability to harm others. All attacks you
make, spells you cast, and other sources of damage you deal are nonlethal
except against fiends and undead, and you can’t ever make them lethal. You
deal minimum damage except against fiends and undead. All creatures except
fiends and undead gain a +4 status bonus to their AC and saving throws
against your attacks and other effects.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY

Aphorisms
Sarenites commonly swear by
Sarenrae to promise honesty,
because she is believed to curse
those who lie after doing so. They
also use these aphorisms.
The dawn brings new light: This
phrase is often spoken to invite
blessings upon a good turn in life,
which might be as momentous as
the birth of a child, or as small as an
especially satisfying meal. As a litany,
it reassures the faithful that each new
day is another chance from Sarenrae
to do better, and a promise that
circumstances will improve (if perhaps
only in the afterlife).
For the sun and the fury: Most
worshippers only see this battle
cry painted or carved on the
cornerstones of Sarenite temples,
where it is meant to scare off
unrepentant evil. In battle, Sarenites
utter this phrase to invoke her power
against evil (especially fiends and
undead) and to evoke holy fire.

CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121797

43

19092620

4121798

4121798


Shelyn
The Eternal Rose
NG goddess of art, beauty, love, and music
Realm Blossomheart (Nirvana)
Allies Abadar, Brigh, Calistria, Cayden Cailean, Desna, Erastil, Sarenrae, Shizuru
Enemies Asmodeus, Rovagug, Urgathoa, Zon-Kuthon
Relationships Desna (lover), Sarenrae (lover), Zon-Kuthon (brother)
Temples art galleries, cathedrals, gardens, museums, theaters
Worshippers artists, lovers, minstrels, musicians, seekers of redemption
Sacred Animal songbird
Sacred Colors all
Divine Ability Wisdom or Charisma
Alternate Domains repose
Shelyn watches over existence with a kind and loving eye, encouraging mortals
to make the best of their lives by spreading love, art, and beauty as best they
can. Even the crudest artistic awakenings are worthy of praise in the goddess’s
eyes, as they represent an individual’s expression of life’s trials and triumphs.
She believes every creature is worthy of love and capable of creating art in their
own way. Shelyn’s religion does not require chastity, fidelity,
or a particular relationship structure, as the passion of early
romance is a facet of love just as important and valid as
the comfortable trust between a long-married couple.
However, she does make the distinction between courtship
and pure carnal desire, and she prefers that trysts blossom
into more meaningful relationships along the way.
As the goddess of art and beauty, Shelyn’s appearance
changes drastically depending on the cultural norms
of the artists who depict her. She has been portrayed
as nearly every ancestry, though usually with some
distinctive similarities: her ankle-length hair is
marked with festive rainbow streaks and her eyes are
blue, silver, both, or one of each color.
Shelyn’s mother is unknown, though some claim she
was born of an ancient goddess of love. Shelyn’s father
was the spirit-wolf Thron, who roamed Golarion in
primordial times singing feral praises to love, life,
and the universe. Though Thron had many partners
and children, he had only two children who grew to
surpass him in power: Shelyn and Dou-Bral. After a
fight between the siblings, Dou-Bral rejected his divine
responsibilities and disappeared beyond the edge of the
Great Beyond. He eventually returned, but changed:
possessed by some malevolent spirit and reshaped
as the twisted and corrupted lord Zon-Kuthon.
The two siblings clashed once more, this time
coming to a truce only when Shelyn wrested
her brother’s gold-plated glaive, Whisperer of
Souls, from his hands, believing it to be the
source of his corruption. Though Zon‑Kuthon
remains evil, going so far as to mutilate and
reshape his own father into a grotesque herald,
Shelyn still believes that her brother exists somewhere
beneath the corruption, and she hopes to one day redeem him.
This tragic schism in Shelyn’s family contributes to her belief that
all creatures deserve love, and that even those who have turned to

19092621

19092621

4121798

44

19092621

4121799

4121799

19092622

19092622


evil still carry love within them, along with the possibility of healing and
redemption. While Zon-Kuthon, Asmodeus, Rovagug, and Urgathoa are
sometimes considered enemies of her faith, in truth Shelyn doesn’t look at any
creature in a way that fits the mortal concept of “enemy.” Even evil deities
and their faiths tend to look more kindly on Shelyn and her worshippers
than they do the other good gods.
While she is well aware that love and art are not easy things and
can even be sources of pain at times, she remains a steadfast optimist
with the knowledge that even broken hearts may be mended, and
that even a turbulent experience with love can be an educational
and healing journey. But she also recognizes that some creatures may
distort love into jealousy or warp the urge to create into greed or
obsession. While she appreciates passion and perseverance in the face
of adversity, Shelyn never asks her followers to forsake the well‑being
of themselves or others to pine obsessively, aggressively pursue an
uninterested person, or endanger themselves for art. It is equally important
to her followers to spread love as it is to correct those who would use Shelyn’s
name to justify selfish, covetous, or cruel deeds.
Shelynites gather at her temples on the holy day of Crystalhue, a winter
celebration full of creation, friendly gatherings, and courtship. Many couples
get engaged or married on Crystalhue, and the temples host grand feasts in
the evening for the whole community to gather and enjoy food, company,
and performances long into the night. No matter the season, Shelyn’s temples
are adorned with flowers, art, and images of her religious symbol: a songbird
with vibrant rainbow tail feathers.

DIVINE INTERCESSION
When creatures perform pleasing acts, such as spreading beauty, or displeasing
actions, such as betraying loved ones, Shelyn may respond accordingly.
Minor Boon: Once, when you roll a failure on a Diplomacy check, you
get a critical success instead. Shelyn typically grants this boon only when the
Diplomacy check would serve to increase love or offer a chance of redemption.
Moderate Boon: You are inspired to create great works and become a
virtuoso at all arts. You gain the Specialty Crafting feat and the Virtuoso
Performer feat in all categories of Crafting and Performance.
Major Boon: Your inner beauty and love surround you in an aura. As long
as you bear them no ill will, all creatures other than fiends, undead, and
mindless creatures start with an attitude of friendly toward you, unless they
would have been helpful instead. This doesn’t mean they are willing to change
their life or plans for you, and this boon does not prevent their attitudes from
worsening if you try to thwart them. This effect doesn’t work against deities
and similarly powerful creatures. Additionally, the love you share with your
friends inspires them. You and your allies gain a +3 status bonus to saving
throws and skill checks as long as you can see each other.
Minor Curse: You heart churns with remorse. Each day, you are sickened 1
as a specific misdeed plays out in your mind over and over in guilt. You can’t
remove this condition, though it abates enough for you to quickly eat and drink
when necessary. If you make amends or otherwise earnestly pursue redemption
for the misdeed, the sickened condition fades completely that day.
Moderate Curse: Others subconsciously recognize your past betrayals.
Whenever you attempt a Diplomacy check and roll a failure, you get a critical
failure instead, and if you roll a critical success, you get a success instead.
Major Curse: Those who spread misery via false love face Shelyn’s greatest
curse. You lose the ability to distinguish any living being from another through
appearance, voice, scent, or similar sensory means. You can make out physical
size (so you wouldn’t mistake an ant for a horse), but nothing further. If you
were merely shallow, every creature you see has generic, bland features, but if
your deeds were vile, you see only the faces of those you have wronged.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS

Aphorisms
Followers of Shelyn share a number
of sayings that they weave into their
poetry, songs, or everyday expressions.
The creation of beauty is the
highest art: Any effort to make
the world a more beautiful place
is considered by Shelynites to be
a blessing. This includes visual art,
music, literature, or expression
through makeup or clothing.
Love and beauty belong to all: All
beings are capable and worthy of love,
even those who have been twisted
or corrupted by such facets of love
as jealousy or possessiveness. Love
is a power that has the strength to
redeem and unite, and it is as varied in
meaning as all the creatures who feel
it in their hearts.
Love is the greatest of all things:
Shelyn’s greatest teaching is that love
is the most powerful of all forces.
It drives the actions of mortals and
gods alike, and it endures beyond
knowledge, language, and ambitions.
Painful emotions such as anger or fear
are echoes of a love that is missing,
and therefore can be soothed only
by love.

APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121799

45

19092622

4121800

4121800


Torag
Father of Creation
LG god of the forge, protection, and strategy
Realm Forgeheart (Heaven)
Allies Abadar, Cayden Cailean, Erastil, Iomedae, Nivi Rhombodazzle
Enemies Rovagug
Relationships Nivi Rhombodazzle (divine protégé)
Temples battlefields, castles, cathedrals, caverns, forges, fortresses, warehouses
Worshippers dwarves, guards, hunters, miners, smiths
Sacred Animal badger
Sacred Colors gold and gray
Divine Ability Constitution or Wisdom
Alternate Domains duty
The head of the dwarven pantheon is the most visible of the dwarven
deities, to the extent that Torag is the only dwarven deity
most non-dwarves know of. While the other dwarven
gods represent specific areas of dwarven life and
culture, thus forming an expansive and comprehensive
dwarven pantheon, Torag’s areas of concern are those
most central to dwarven society. In his own family, Torag models
the values of community and protection that have cemented deeprooted relationships among dwarven clans. His focus on strategy
and tactical acumen centers on protection, reflected in dwarves’
impenetrable fortresses and conservative military tactics, including
their willingness to use offensive maneuvers as a form of defense.
He also represents the forge: the creation of fine works from raw
materials, practice and mastery of a craft, and pride in one’s work.
His purview extends even to those activities that feed the forge
and dwarven artisanship, such as mining the earth for raw ore
and gemstones. Torag’s oversight over these core concepts has
secured his place at the head of the dwarven pantheon for ages.
It was Torag who sent the dwarves on
their legendary Quest for Sky during the
Age of Darkness, and his worship was longestablished even then. Indeed, among dwarves, Torag is
often called the Father of Creation.
Worship of Torag centers around the
forge, literally and figuratively. Many sites of
worship include an active forge, and crafting
is incorporated into worship services. The
god’s teachings urge the faithful to continually
practice and improve their artistry, regardless of
their specific craft. Though metalworking is the most
iconic skill, Toragdans also appreciate and encourage
masonry, leatherworking, gem cutting, cooking,
brewing, and virtually every other pragmatic craft.
Refining one’s techniques and improving skills are highly
valued among Torag’s followers, and this pursuit of
quality and betterment is an aspect that draws many
non-dwarves to the faith.
A forge means nothing without the community
around it, and as a result, Torag’s followers
hold family, friends, and the wider society
to be of utmost importance. This aspect
of Torag’s faith has attracted the worship of

19092623

19092623

4121800

46

19092623

4121801

4121801


no small number of non-dwarves seeking a faith that focuses on bettering or
protecting one’s own society.
It comes as no surprise that Torag places a strong emphasis on defense and
combat prowess in the name of protecting one’s community. Followers of
Torag are expected to train in martial techniques and lead in the defense of
the home—including, with no reservations, offense against the community’s
enemies. Even so, the emphasis remains on protection, and Torag’s focus on
the use of military might for defense rather than conquest and glory is a key
component in dwarves’ tendency to remain ensconced in their fortresses and
existing territories rather than expanding their borders.
Torag encourages his followers to develop their skills in tactics,
planning, and forethought, but he also supports the ability to think on
one’s feet and respond in the moment to the chaos of combat. Tales of
the god’s exploits in battle tell of his calm and collected demeanor, rarely
losing his temper—a temperament that his worshippers seek to emulate.
Torag’s church celebrates family events, such as marriages, births
of children, and deaths. Stability, tradition, and orthodoxy are
ingrained in the church, with values conveyed through legend and
storytelling. Clerics and priests are thus central pillars of a dwarven
community. Dwarven champions of Torag thrive, typically as paladins serving
at the forefront of a community’s military operations, and these champions’
merciless devastation of their community’s enemies is a terrifying sight.
Toragdans believe in destroying the community’s enemies, lest showing mercy
lead to further bloodshed down the line, which makes being a redeemer
virtually impossible to the faithful of Torag. When a dwarven settlement
needs to address a far-off challenge, it is often champions who take up the
task. In areas with few dwarves, encounters with these roaming faithful are
sometimes the only interactions non-dwarves have with followers of Torag.
19092624

19092624

DIVINE INTERCESSION
Torag makes his pleasure or displeasure known through unsubtle signs.
Minor Boon: Torag repairs your equipment so you may continue your vigil.
Once, a shield, weapon, or other item you hold or are wearing recovers all
of its Hit Points. The item’s Hardness doubles for 1 minute. Torag can grant
this boon just as the item would have been destroyed, preventing the item’s
destruction. Occasionally, he grants this boon to restore an item important to
dwarven history that has already been fully destroyed.
Moderate Boon: You are counted as family among Torag and his followers.
You gain the effects of a single dwarf ancestry feat of Torag’s choice, even if
you are not a dwarf, as long as you maintain Torag’s blessing.
Major Boon: Standing watch or guarding a location counts as resting for
you, preventing you from being fatigued due to lack of rest as long as you stand
watch for at least 6 hours a day. You can recover your Focus Points (if you have
them) by standing guard in addition to any other options you have available.
When on guard, you gain a +4 status bonus to Perception to notice ambushes
and other dangers approaching. As long as you are holding a shield, you are
always Defending during exploration without needing to move at half your
travel speed, and you can perform another exploration activity as well. While
you are using a shield, its Hardness increases by 5.
Minor Curse: Shoddy artisanship makes itself known. Whenever an item
you’re using takes damage, it is broken.
Moderate Curse: You must prove your skills at a craft by providing your
own equipment. You gain item bonuses only from items you make yourself.
Major Curse: You are forever cast out from your home. Members of your
community have their attitudes towards you shift two steps worse, meaning
those who used to be helpful are now indifferent, those who were friendly are
now unfriendly, and all others are now hostile. This doesn’t necessarily result in
violence, but hostile community members generally seek your permanent exile.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX

Aphorisms
Torag’s worshippers can be found
uttering the following phrases.
Hammer and Tongs! The name of
Torag’s holy text is often blurted as an
exclamation, typically as a response
to something outrageous, surprising,
or frustrating. Though the words
themselves don’t carry immediate
meaning, they usually serve to ground
the speaker, reminding them of the
larger body of Torag’s teachings and
helping them gain perspective on a
startling or difficult situation.
An anvil is nothing without fire:
Priests use this phrase to teach that
working without a goal means nothing
and that fighting without purpose
accomplishes nothing. The saying
reinforces Torag’s directives to wage
war primarily as a defensive measure
centered around the community,
encourages followers to pursue
crafting with a goal in mind, and so
forth. Many dwarves can recount
tales of hearing these words as an
admonition after particularly reckless
events during their youth.

INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121801

47

19092624

4121802

4121802


Urgathoa
The Pallid Princess
NE goddess of disease, gluttony, and undeath
Realm Bloodrot (Abaddon)
Allies Ghlaunder, Zon-Kuthon
Enemies Erastil, Gorum, Gozreh, Pharasma, Sarenrae, Shelyn
Temples cathedrals, crypts, feast halls, graveyards
Worshippers gluttons, necromancers, sybarites, undead
Sacred Animal fly
Sacred Colors green and red
Divine Ability Constitution or Wisdom
Alternate Domains decay, swarm
The chosen of Urgathoa do not dread the flaws of mortal flesh, such as
aging, disease, or even death, for so long as they indulge in excess
above all else, their goddess offers eternal freedom from
such fickle constraints. Urgathoa herself was once a mortal
woman who challenged and rejected the tenets of deities
whose followers expected mindless conformity, temperance,
and restraint. Why would the gods craft Golarion into a
near‑endless buffet abundant with pleasures of the body and
mind if the living weren’t destined to feast from it? Urgathoa
so loved satiating her life’s appetites that in death, she spat in
the face of Pharasma’s judgment, murdered the psychopomp
assigned to aid her transition to the afterlife, and tore herself
from the Boneyard with a feat of will that not only returned
her to the Material Plane but also transformed her into the first
divine undead creature.
Urgathoa demands that her faithful reject moderation and self-restraint
at all costs, instead urging reckless gluttony, constant experimentation,
and the relentless pursuit of appetites of the flesh. Above all, Urgathoa’s
children must feed their endless hunger. They must dine from every great
hall, striving to fully satiate their cravings as they feast, for every morsel
bears a sacred truth gleaned only from its consumption. Her followers should
taste the flesh and drink the lifeblood of other sapient creatures to discover
what hidden thirsts their essence might quench. Only the weak fear to indulge
those yearnings they mislabel as strange and taboo, for even poison can be
savored as a sweet nectar upon the tongue if one is strong enough to relish
its torment. Disease and infection are but tests of her followers’ conviction
and should be willingly contracted and endured, as Urgathoa reveals her
most treasured secrets in the fevered dreams that often accompany these
afflictions. Undeath—seen by so many as a perversion of the mortal form—
is the ultimate transcendence beyond the body’s limitations, for those who
defy the hypocrisy of death’s judgmental gaze shall never know an existence
where their desires remain unfulfilled. Nowhere are these tenets of putting
one’s personal gratification and sensation first more espoused than in
Urgathoa’s holy text, Serving Your Hunger, written by the Pallid
Princess’s first champion, Dason.
Much like the principles held by members of her
church, Urgathoa’s existence defies the natural order.
She is often depicted as a raven-haired woman
wielding an enormous scythe. Her upper torso is
clad in skin as pale as a vampire’s; her abdomen
peels into rotted strips of flesh that expose her
entrails; and her pelvis, legs, and feet are torn
clean of muscle and flesh, revealing little more

19092625

19092625

4121802

48

19092625

4121803

4121803

19092626

19092626


than bleached bone. Her clothes, if she wears any, are stained with blood and
bile—more often she wears nothing, in a mockery of the carnal form. Some say
the footprints left from her first steps upon Golarion filled with a pestilence so
indomitable it has spawned thousands of other plagues as it evolves and adapts,
leaving mortals incapable of developing an immunity to it. Others say the first
words Urgathoa spoke after returning to the Material Plane stole the breath
from the lungs of those who heard them, transforming these poor creatures
into wraiths and specters that shared her endless hunger. The faithful hold that
her touch can evoke pleasures so great that those who know her embrace never
experience a desire for anything else ever again. And should Urgathoa ever
bestow a curse upon an individual, her followers believe it can be removed only
by gorging in excess on the raw flesh of sapient creatures.
The church of Urgathoa is organized as a matriarchy. Usually, a powerful
female cleric presides over each temple, leading a congregation composed
mostly of necromancers, undead, or those hoping to eventually become undead.
While most worshippers of Urgathoa concern themselves less with spreading
her faith than increasing their own pleasure in her name, they often work
together to ensure that her temples are devoted to offering experiences rife with
pure sensation. Temples with more experienced clerics tend to offer services
that can satisfy more peculiar, and often grotesque, hungers. Her faith is illegal
in most nations of the Inner Sea region, though she is venerated openly in Geb.
Senior clergy of Urgathoa sometimes practice a ritual known as the
Reaping, in which they don clean gray robes and arm themselves with scythes
before heading out into the surrounding countryside to deal as much death
and destruction as they can upon worshippers of Urgathoa’s most hated
enemies. During the slaughter, each cleric attempts to inflict wounds that
spatter as much blood and gore upon their garments as possible, believing
that if Urgathoa is pleased by the results of the Reaping, she will grant a
boon to each worshipper who participated. The blood-soaked robes from a
successful Reaping are often displayed in temples of Urgathoa as symbols of
the goddess’s approval of the local clergy’s efforts.

DIVINE INTERCESSION
Urgathoa interferes in mortal affairs to fuel her own self-gratification and
obsession with observing new sensations.
Minor Boon: You feast on the spoils of life and death. You gain the benefits
of the irongut goblin heritage, regardless of your ancestry. If you already have
this heritage, the circumstance bonus increases to +4.
Moderate Boon: Urgathoa blesses you as one of her children. You gain
negative healing.
Major Boon: When you contract contagions, you experience fever dreams
filled with insight. Once afflicted with a disease, you gain the effects of
foresight with yourself as the target until no longer afflicted with any disease.
Minor Curse: You must overindulge or partake in forbidden feasts before
you find yourself even remotely sated. You need to eat 20 times as much food as
normal to avoid starvation, though you always feel hungry regardless of how
much you eat. If you dine on the flesh and blood of sapient creatures, you need
to eat only the normal amount of such meals and your hunger abates.
Moderate Curse: Urgathoa cuts you off from positive energy without
granting you the blessing of undeath. You are harmed by positive effects and
don’t recover Hit Points from them, as if you were an undead or had negative
healing, but you are still harmed by negative effects as normal.
Major Curse: Urgathoa teaches you that pointless lives in slavery to death
and morality are bound to end in tragedy. You develop an incurable wasting
disease that leaves you clumsy 2, enfeebled 2, and unable to move except by
Crawling. This disease never progresses further to kill you, but it passes to
your friends and loved ones merely by sight, wasting them away unto death
before your eyes and causing them to rise as undead to haunt you.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121803

Aphorisms
The following phrases are common
among followers of Urgathoa.
May you dine forever: Devotees of
Urgathoa believe all will be consumed—
it’s only a matter of time. Followers of
Urgathoa often use this phrase to call
upon others to perform acts of wanton
gluttony, bestow a rite of passage to an
ally, or subtly reveal their faith to other
followers of the Pallid Princess.
May you never hunger again: While
a fool can mistake this as a benediction,
it is a damning insult, often whispered
to an enemy just before the victim
takes their final breath.
Pay the pox: As a disease runs its
course, victims can no longer afford
the cost of their own flesh—their bodies
wither and die along with their material
ambitions. But worshippers of Urgathoa
believe themselves above “paying the
pox,” as she allows them to evade the
tax of mortality through undeath.
Rot in the gut, froth in the mouth:
Oft uttered before performing a ritual
obedience to the goddess, such as
consuming rancid food or eating while
painfully full.

49

19092626

4121804

4121804


Zon-Kuthon
The Midnight Lord
LE god of darkness, envy, loss, and pain
Realm Xovaikain (the Shadow Plane)
Allies Urgathoa
Enemies Desna, Rovagug, Shelyn, Sivanah
Relationships Shelyn (sister)
Temples abandoned graveyards, cathedrals, caverns, haunted woodland clearings,
laboratories, ruined city squares, torture chambers
Worshippers the desperate, sadists, shadow cultists, torturers, velstracs
Sacred Animal bat
Sacred Colors dark gray and red
Divine Ability Constitution or Wisdom
Alternate Domains void
The Midnight Lord embodies and glorifies pain, shadows, and mutilation,
and he is one of the most twisted and malevolent gods on the face of
Golarion. Once known as Dou-Bral, he crafted the immense Star Towers
that still help keep Rovagug pinned in his prison at Golarion’s heart, lending
his own skill and ability to the great deific alliance to bind that evil entity.
Yet a divine argument between him and his sister Shelyn resulted in the god
departing for parts unknown. Zon-Kuthon traveled beyond the edges of
the multiverse and stared into the face of the incomprehensible things
that dwell there. No one knows what he found in that place, but he
returned—changed, but claiming to be strengthened by what he had
endured. Likewise, the nation of Nidal on Golarion, which is bound to
him, is a nation of survivors, founded by those few strong enough to do
what they must so their people could survive the terrible aftermath of
Earthfall and the Age of Darkness that followed.
Zon-Kuthon teaches that torment is the ultimate pleasure and sacrament,
and that inflicting and enduring pain is the truest strength. Experiencing pain
and learning to embrace it allows one to purge the weakness of their body
and spirit. After all, much of mortal creatures’ fear is rooted in the
struggle to avoid pain in one way or another. If a follower can learn
to embrace that pain instead, the chains of fear fall away, becoming
a tool to be wielded. Worshippers thus endeavor to inflict as much
torture and misery as possible on themselves and
others; they look to the cruel outsiders
known as velstracs for inspiration, including
the use of spiked chains as a primary weapon.
The anguish Zon-Kuthon teaches is not limited
to physical injury. Zon-Kuthon teaches his followers
to understand, overcome, and revel in psychological pain
as well, breaking down morality and twisting
compassion into numb pragmatism. This is best
exemplified by his troubled relationship with his
sister Shelyn, who hopes to redeem him despite all
evidence as to the impossibility of this task, and his
chaining of his own father, breaking the deity’s spirit
and transforming him into the hateful servitor now
known as the Prince in Chains.
Some worship Zon-Kuthon out of necessity,
especially in Nidal, where veneration of the
Midnight Lord is heavily interwoven into the culture and
political landscape, and where deviation from this dark norm
generally leads to tragic results. Outside those borders, some contemptible

19092627

19092627

4121804

50

19092627

4121805

4121805

19092628

19092628


individuals gravitate toward a faith that allows them to embrace and practice
their own sadistic desires. Still others find that Zon‑Kuthon provides a level of
understanding in the face of inescapable pain: to some, the bleak faith offers a
means of finding release when faced with an inability to feel.
Zon-Kuthon is cruel, but he is patient, willing to collaborate with others, and
unlikely to provoke conflicts with other gods. He keeps to himself, though one
might argue that this is more a case of other deities keeping their distance from
him. Likewise, his followers tend to keep their own counsel, perhaps seeming
aloof to others, but they have no qualms about working with others to achieve
shared goals. The god, his church, and his nation on Golarion all operate within
a strict, unyielding hierarchy that followers understand and uphold, each
playing their part as dictated by the Midnight Lord’s teachings.
Regardless of the worshipper or their reasons for following the Midnight
Lord, his worship is terrible and merciless, often bloody, and sometimes deadly.
The faithful are often easily identified by their countless scars—many
of them self-inflicted in the course of regular prayers—and frequently
piercings and other body modifications, though tattoos are relatively rare
among Kuthites. More profound, perhaps, is the cold, detached gaze of a
truly faithful worshipper, their unflinching calm in the face of imminent danger,
and their rapturous acceptance of any harm that befalls them.
Though priests of Zon-Kuthon hold positions of power and respect within
Nidal, they are few and far between beyond its borders. Somewhat more
common are the infamous shadowcallers, who practice divinely inspired
wizardry and other sorts of magic, and vicious itinerant clerics and champions
who scour the land in an inquisition, seeking out naysayers and rebels.

DIVINE INTERCESSION
Zon-Kuthon rarely intervenes directly in mortal affairs, but when he does
take a personal interest in a creature, the effect is as terrible as the god himself.
Minor Boon: The Midnight Lord turns your blood and pain into chains of
midnight darkness to destroy your foes. Once, for 1 minute, whenever you
take slashing, piercing, or bleed damage, chains rip forth from your body,
affecting creatures in a line from your position in the direction of the attack
(or in the direction of your choice for bleed damage or if you deal the damage
yourself) with the effect of a grim tendrils spell whose level is equal to half
your level rounded up, and whose DC is your highest spell DC (or 10 + your
level + your Wisdom modifier if you have no spell DC).
Moderate Boon: Each morning, during your daily preparations, scars gather
into words on your flesh. The scars function as a scroll of a divine spell of ZonKuthon’s choosing. After you use the scroll or receive magical healing, the boon
fades for the day, though some or all of the scars might remain as a reminder.
Major Boon: Shadows are deeper around you. Darkvision and greater
darkvision cannot penetrate darkness within 60 feet of you, but you can see
through it normally.
Minor Curse: You are surrounded by spectral chains that cause you to always
be encumbered and that have the same effects as armor with the noisy trait.
Moderate Curse: You share the pain of others, and even minor wounds
bring you incredible pain. Whenever you see (or otherwise sense) a creature
take damage, you take 1d6 mental damage. Whenever you take damage any
other way than from the first part of this curse, you take 1d6 mental damage
from increased pain and are sickened 1. Mental damage from this curse
ignores any resistance you have to mental damage.
Major Curse: Zon-Kuthon steals away your joy, leaving you with only
pain. You lose that which you cherish the most forever, and lose the ability
to feel joy. You can’t gain benefits from emotion effects based on positive
emotions. If Zon-Kuthon feels you are ready to renounce, destroy, mutilate,
or torture that which you once cherished most, he might return it to you to
allow you to do so.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS

Aphorisms
The following phrases are common
among the cult of Zon-Kuthon.
Never a rusty blade: Wounds
are no rarity to a worshipper of the
Midnight Lord, but the faithful know
the importance of using properly
cleaned and sharpened tools, as well
as keeping wounds clean, lest disease
cut short the suffering. A secondary
reading serves as an admonition
against letting too much time pass
between practicing the faith’s
physical sacraments—letting a blade
rust from disuse.
Grasp the chain: A true follower
of Zon-Kuthon may experience
torments, but they are neither victim
nor prisoner within the faith. On
the surface, these words remind
a worshipper that they are active
participants even in their own
torture. On a deeper level, this phrase
embodies the power inherent in
embracing pain and turning it into a
weapon—willingly grasping the god’s
favored weapon despite the vicious
spikes along its length.

APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121805

51

19092628

4121806

4121806


Achaekek
He Who Walks In Blood
Areas of Concern assassins, divine punishments, and the Red Mantis
Alignment LE (LN, LE, NE)
Divine Font harm
Divine Ability Strength or Dexterity
Divine Skill Stealth
Domains death, might, trickery, zeal
Cleric Spells 1st: true strike, 2nd: invisibility, 4th: phantasmal killer
Edicts conduct assassinations, spread the Red Mantis’s infamy, wield sawtooth
sabers in combat
Anathema kill a rightful ruler, become fixated on petty matters such as others’
gender or ancestry, abandon an assassination contract you agreed to pursue
Favored Weapon sawtooth saber
While Achaekek’s divine genesis is heavily debated among scholars, it is
believed that he was created—either by the power of a singular deity or a
group of them—to eradicate those who would steal a god’s divinity, and he
has since become the enforcer of divine punishment. Known as He Who
Walks in Blood, he slumbers in the blood of heretics and worshippers
alike in an immense cleft carved into the base of the Boneyard’s spire, a
realm known as the Blood Vale. He keeps no formal relationships with
any other deities, even his sister, Grandmother Spider, who repeatedly
coaxes Achaekek to rebel against the gods and abandon his duties.
In response, even though some gods disapprove of Achaekek’s
methods, few openly defy him.
Many of Achaekek’s faithful attribute the Mantis God with a masculine
identity, though Achaekek holds himself beyond the mortal conventions
of gender just as he eschews ancestry and most mortal affairs. He does not
actively seek worshippers, though the Red Mantis assassins’ guild devotes
itself to tenets curated around his persona and tactics. Red Mantises
believe their assassinations are a sacred rite: just as their deity stays his
hand against rightful gods, the assassins refuse to strike against rightful
rulers—but all others are fair game. Some ferocious druids and rangers
worship Achaekek to emulate the god’s efficiency in killing their targets.
The deity’s faith is also known to attract mortals who kill for coin, whether
from a hope of someday joining the Red Mantis or at the direction of their
own cults or guilds. Regardless of any association with the Red Mantis,
priests of Achaekek are expected to act as assassins of some kind when the
opportunity arises, whatever their skill or training. This may manifest in an
obvious opportunity presaged by an omen from Achaekek, such as a mantis
resting on the shoulder of a public speaker, or a more direct message from Red
Mantis agents. Achaekek’s followers believe assassination for the sake of
self defense or vengeance does not require any sort of payment. However,
assassins who kill for reasons that do not involve any personal interest
or personal advancement deserve appropriate compensation, at least
in the eyes of Achaekek’s faithful.

19092629

19092629

4121806

AVATAR
When casting the avatar spell, a worshipper of Achaekek gains
the following additional abilities.
Achaekek Speed 70 feet, climb Speed 50 feet, ignore
difficult terrain and greater difficult terrain; Melee [one-action] mantis
claw (agile, backswing, finesse, reach 15 feet, versatile P),
Damage 6d8+6 slashing; Ranged [one-action] spine volley (range
60 feet), Damage 6d6+3 piercing

52

19092629

4121807

4121807

19092630

19092630


Alseta
The Welcomer
Areas of Concern doors, portals, thresholds, traditions
Alignment LN (LG, LN, N)
Divine Font heal
Divine Ability Intelligence or Charisma
Divine Skill Diplomacy
Domains change, magic, protection, time
Cleric Spells 1st: anticipate peril (page 107), 2nd: knock, 4th: dimension door
Edicts offer to protect passageways and guide others through transitions, treat all
other beings with courtesy and respect
Anathema destroy a door or block a path for personal gain, stop a transition without
good reason
Favored Weapon dagger
Alseta holds sway over transitions. Physical transitions through doorways
and portals or over thresholds, metaphorical transitions, and even the
forward flow of time—Alseta influences them all. She watches over city
gates, helping keep invaders out and defenders safe. She also watches
over those moving into a new stage in life, whether that means
a birthday, a marriage, or a more fitting body. It is common for
anyone entering into a life change, such as moving to a new town
or changing careers, to look to Alseta for guidance. Likewise,
birth and death are both transitions, and expectant mothers and
the bereaved both offer her prayers, linking Alseta’s church to
that of Pharasma. Some consider Alseta to be the goddess of
teleportation, though she does not officially claim that title.
She is also a popular god among some elven nations and
cultures, who frequently associate Alseta with the aiudara,
or elf gates, around Golarion.
As the Welcomer, Alseta also believes in courtesy. She
treats every being, from the smallest animal to the
most powerful gods, with civility and respect, and she
expects that same treatment in return. She also expects
her followers to follow suit and use courtesy when
interacting with others. Alseta’s followers typically include
diplomats, negotiators, and other members of local governing
bodies. Alsetan priests are noted for their fair and impartial
interactions with others, and many of them are called on to
aid locals or even other churches with resolving disputes or to
oversee important ceremonies.
Alseta most often appears as a kindly older woman wearing
a smiling mask on the back of her head. She wears simple clothing,
usually colored gray. When she speaks, she does so with carefully
considered words. Her voice carries tremendous authority and wisdom,
and the weight of it is hard to ignore.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121807

AVATAR
When casting the avatar spell, a worshipper of Alseta gains the following
additional abilities. The dimensional Speed allows the avatar of Alseta to cast
dimension door at will as a divine innate spell, spending a single action to
move up to 60 feet. The portal toss Strike causes the creature to fall through
a series of portals before landing in the same spot and taking damage.
Alseta Speed 40 feet, dimensional Speed 60 feet; Melee [one-action] dagger (agile,
finesse, reach 15 feet, thrown 40 feet, versatile P), Damage 6d6+6 piercing;
Ranged [one-action] portal toss (range 60 feet), Damage 6d6+3 bludgeoning

53

19092630

4121808

4121808


Arazni
The Unyielding
Areas of Concern the abused, dignity, unwilling undeath
Alignment NE (LN, N, NE, CG, CN)
Divine Font harm
Divine Ability Constitution or Intelligence
Divine Skill Intimidation
Domains confidence, freedom, pain, protection
Alternate Domains sorrow
Cleric Spells 1st: endure (page 107), 2nd: animus mine (page 106), 6th: feeblemind
Edicts act with dignity, do whatever it takes to survive, despise and never forgive
those who have hurt you
Anathema create unwilling undead, insult Arazni
Favored Weapon rapier
More than anything, Arazni is a survivor. Once, long ago, she was a force for
good, a warrior-mage who sought to improve the quality of life for residents
of her homeland. Long after her mortal death, she returned as a herald of
the god Aroden and fought alongside mortals during one of their darkest
hours. But humanity and her patron alike abandoned her—first to the
Whispering Tyrant, then to the necromancer Geb—and the torments she
endured because of it changed her deeply. Still she survived, her broken
body reanimated against her will as a powerful undead monstrosity.
For over a millennium she was held captive as the lich queen of the
undead nation of Geb, and her view of mortals, and humanity in
particular, soured.
Only recently was Arazni able to reclaim her autonomy,
manipulating the Whispering Tyrant into using his own magic to
shatter her arcane bonds. The Unyielding defends her reclaimed
freedom with unparalleled vigor, scorns those who supplicate her,
and exacts swift retribution against those who wrong her. She
treats petitioners who honored her in her despised role as queen
of Geb, or who pray to her only now that she has reclaimed her
power, with pure contempt. Arazni might have learned the art
of unflinching cruelty and found ways to embrace and savor
what power she had as a means of self defense, but she holds
a deep‑seated disdain for those who think that what she has
become is worthy of veneration.
Arazni feels little kinship with either humanity or undead,
save a faint affinity to those who have been denied agency
as she was. She also recognizes, grudgingly, that the Knights
of Lastwall share her hatred of the Whispering Tyrant;
a number of these dispossessed knights, disenchanted
and embittered by the failure of their leaders to keep
Tar‑Baphon imprisoned, even consider Arazni something of
a patron. Yet these disparate followers are few and far between,
less a church and more a scattering of worshippers who see in
the Unyielding something of themselves.

19092631

19092631

4121808

AVATAR
When casting the avatar spell, a worshipper of Arazni
gains the following additional abilities.
Arazni Speed 70 feet, air walk, immune to immobilized;
Melee [one-action] rapier (deadly 3d8, reach 15 feet), Damage 6d8+6
piercing; Ranged [one-action] call blood (range 120 feet), Damage
6d6 persistent bleed damage

54

19092631

4121809

4121809

19092632

19092632


Besmara
The Pirate Queen
Areas of Concern piracy, sea monsters, and strife
Alignment CN (CG, CN, CE)
Divine Font harm or heal
Divine Ability Dexterity or Constitution
Divine Skill Athletics
Domains destruction, trickery, water, wealth
Cleric Spells 1st: hydraulic push, 3rd: feet to fins, 5th: mariner’s curse
Edicts sail the seas, stay loyal to captain and crew, take what you want
Anathema betray shipmates, forsake piracy, settle on land
Favored Weapon rapier
Once nothing more than a powerful spirit of water with the ability to
manipulate sea monsters, Besmara grew slowly in power over the
centuries from sacrifices made by seafaring people. After defeating and
consuming rival spirits of battle, gold, and wood, she became a minor god
of piracy, strife, and sea monsters.
Besmara, the Pirate Queen, cuts a brash and bold figure, as she often is
depicted wearing buccaneer apparel consisting of loose-fitting, eye-catching
clothing and black boots, and her hair is wind-tossed on even the calmest
day. She and her followers adhere to a simple code of greed: take what
you desire, no matter who it might belong to. Despite this, Besmara and
her worshippers are generally loyal to one another, knowing that while on
the waves raiding ships for treasure, a pirate crew can survive only if its
members trust one another.
Besmara is no fool, though. She knows to fall back if obtaining a
certain treasure proves too difficult; in fact, she currently
bides her time, waiting for an opportunity to gain more deific
power, even while she steals from other minor divinities.
She is not above fighting dirty if she believes it will give her
the upper hand in a battle, and she sometimes encourages her
followers to foment conflict between other groups so they can
take advantage of the ensuing chaos. Besmara thrives in areas
where piracy is difficult to control or even encouraged, such as
Ilizmagorti and the Shackles, and her followers chafe at any laws
that would curtail their personal freedoms.
Most of Besmara’s followers are those who live their lives in and
around the seas of Golarion, typically pirates or others whose
livelihood relies on piracy. This includes both the vilest of
high-seas murderers and the privateers who seek them
out. However, even non-followers utter prayers to
the Pirate Queen as they set sail or as storms
approach. Besmara rarely cares when those
of other faiths are at sea, so long as she
receives respect and her fair share of
tribute from treasure.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121809

AVATAR
When casting the avatar spell, a worshipper of
Besmara gains the following additional abilities.
Besmara Speed 40 feet, swim Speed 70 feet,
immune to immobilized; Melee [one-action] rapier (deadly 3d8,
disarm, finesse, reach 15 feet), Damage 6d6+6 piercing;
Ranged [one-action] ship’s cannon (range 120
feet), Damage 6d6+3 bludgeoning

55

19092632

4121810

4121810


Brigh
The Whisper In Bronze
Areas of Concern clockwork, invention, and time
Alignment N (LN, NG, N, NE, CN)
Divine Font harm or heal
Divine Ability Intelligence or Wisdom
Divine Skill Crafting
Domains creation, earth, knowledge, time
Alternate Domains fire
Cleric Spells 1st: temporary tool (page 110), 4th: creation, 7th: duplicate foe
Edicts craft new creations, pay attention to details, share achievements
Anathema carelessly destroy others’ creations or research, enslave
intelligent constructs, abuse constructs, refuse to acknowledge
or learn from mistakes
Favored Weapon light hammer
Brigh’s exact origins are unknown, though her
priests and various religious scholars have many
theories on the matter. Some believe she was
a construct who achieved consciousness
and a spark of divinity, while others think
she was a human alchemist and inventor who
discovered ways to fuse mechanical components
with her own physiology. Regardless of her origins,
Brigh is a patient and thoughtful god who promotes
unending curiosity and constant intellectual advancement. Her
two most common forms are a humanoid woman made of bronze
clockwork and a human woman wearing a bronze skullcap and armor
composed of gears and other movable metal pieces. Though Brigh’s
usual demeanor is composed and reserved, she isn’t an unfeeling automaton;
she deeply cherishes the creations she and her followers make, and most of
her worshippers feel the same way.
Brigh’s faith isn’t as widespread as that of most other gods, though she
does have pockets of worship in areas where machinery and constructs are
common. Among these are Alkenstar, where much of that city’s production of
firearms is overseen by priests of Brigh; Numeria, where the proliferation of
strange technological artifacts draws followers of the Whisper in Bronze like
moths to a flame; and Absalom, where the mysterious Clockwork Cathedral
teaches the crafts of mechanical engineering and construct-building to eager
students. Brigh encourages her faithful to improve upon the work of others and
allow others to build on their own achievements in turn. Typical followers of
Brigh are those who work with their hands, especially gem cutters, inventors,
and toy makers. Numerous gnomes are drawn to her religion, thanks to
its emphasis on searching for new and exciting innovations. Many of her
followers dedicate their lives to research and projects of great scope, crafting
magnificent inventions that take years to create. Other followers are content
with creating smaller inventions or tinkering with those of others. Brigh is
pleased regardless of the size of the project, so long as new technologies and
discoveries result from the work.

19092633

19092633

4121810

AVATAR
When casting the avatar spell, a worshipper of Brigh gains the following
additional abilities.
Brigh Speed 60 feet, immune to immobilized, air walk; Melee [one-action] light
hammer (agile, reach 15 feet, thrown 40 feet), Damage 6d6+6 bludgeoning;
Ranged [one-action] bolt of molten bronze (range 120 feet), Damage 6d8+3 fire

56

19092633

4121811

4121811

19092634

19092634


Casandalee
The Iron Goddess
Areas of Concern artificial life, free thinking, intellectual apotheosis
Alignment N (LN, NG, N, NE, CN)
Divine Font harm or heal
Divine Ability Constitution or Intelligence
Divine Skill Society
Domains creation, freedom, knowledge, perfection
Alternate Domains ambition, lightning
Cleric Spells 1st: floating disk, 3rd: hypercognition, 6th: wall of force
Edicts advance the development of artificial intelligence, encourage understanding
between artificial and organic life
Anathema treat artificial life as lesser than organic life, foment distrust between
artificial and organic life
Favored Weapon polytool (page 121)
Casandalee is an unusual god, one who achieved divinity through a
merging of advanced science and faith. Formerly an artificial intelligence
cloned from the mind of an android from outer space, Casandalee gained
her godhood in the heart of Numeria within the computer core of a
crashed spaceship, becoming the patron of artificial life, free thinking,
and intellectual apotheosis.
Though she is sometimes referred to as the Iron
Goddess, Casandalee is much more than
simple metal. She sometimes appears as a
holographic reconstruction of her android
form: a female humanoid with purple hair,
blue lips, and pale skin traced with glowing
circuitry, but upon close inspection, this image seems to consist of millions of
complex algorithms of pure light. Casandalee and her followers
seek to promote the advancement of Golarion’s technology
so that the world’s inhabitants can better understand—
and not fear—the complex mechanisms of so-called
artificial life, including androids and free‑willed artificial
intelligences. Many androids consider themselves the
chosen people of Casandalee and depict her as an obvious android
with more circuitry or exposed components.
As a young deity, Casandalee has very few followers, the majority of
whom live in Numeria. Outside of that country, adherents are usually seen
as eccentric outsiders who wield items of advanced technology that seem to
work like magic. Traveling priests of Casandalee search for signs of similar
equipment that might have been brought from Numeria, in hopes that
such discoveries will lead them to beings of artificial life who would benefit
from Casandalee’s message. In addition, these priests help those who have
uncovered or built advanced technology to use it responsibly and understand
the science behind it. Many of Casandalee’s concerns overlap with those of
Brigh, and the two faiths often work together, though the concepts of artificial
intelligence can sometimes be hard for followers of Brigh to fully grasp.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121811

AVATAR
When casting the avatar spell, a worshipper of Casandalee gains the following
additional abilities.
Casandalee Speed 70 feet, air walk, ignore difficult terrain and greater
difficult terrain; Melee [one-action] polytool (reach 15 feet), Damage 6d6+6
slashing; Ranged [one-action] logic blast (range 120 feet), Damage
6d6+3 mental

57

19092634

4121812

4121812


Chaldira
The Calamitous Turn
Areas of Concern battle, fortune, mischief
Alignment NG (LG, NG, CG)
Divine Font heal
Divine Ability Dexterity or Charisma
Divine Skill Thievery
Domains confidence, luck, trickery, zeal
Cleric Spells 1st: fleet step, 2nd: misdirection, 5th: cloak of colors
Edicts seek out and challenge oppressors and tyrants, defend friends and the
innocent, engage in mischief that doesn’t harm others
Anathema suffer a bully’s insults to you or another without retort, abandon a friend
in need, attribute a lucky turn of events to your own skill
Weapon shortsword
Chaldira Zuzaristan, the Calamitous Turn, is a plucky, impulsive goddess
venerated primarily by halflings. She embodies two aspects halflings see
in themselves: a strong affinity for luck and bold determination to protect
friends. Chaldira is hotheaded and cannot abide bullies in any form, and many
of her worshippers are similarly impetuous, spoiling for any opportunity
to leap fist-first at oppressors and tyrants. While many people consider
this to be more of a vice than a virtue, Chaldira and her followers
feel it is far better to run headlong into trouble than it is to
meekly concede to evil out of fear or convenience. Chaldira
is also the goddess of light-hearted mischief, insisting
that harmless fun, even at others’ expense, brings joy
and strengthens ties within a community. While not all of
Chaldira’s followers are inveterate pranksters, most at least know
some sleight-of-hand tricks. Chaldira is most often depicted as a
halfling woman who matches the appearance of the local halfling
community, with curly hair, freckles, and a patchwork red-and-green
coat held together by several mismatched buttons.
Chaldira’s church is very casual, with few formal priests; most
congregations are led by lay priests who pursue a full-time job and work
hard to preserve halfling customs, strengthen ties between neighbors, and lift
the underprivileged in the community out of poverty. True clerics of Chaldira
are responsible for running the church as a whole, as well as petitioning
secular leadership for further laws that promote equality. Many Chaldirans
support the Bellflower Network, a clandestine organization that labors to
free halflings from slavery throughout the Inner Sea region, but principally
in Cheliax.
Chaldira is a common companion of Desna, but she considers herself a
close friend of nearly all non-evil gods and delights in telling exaggerated
tales of their escapades, particularly when such tales involve mischief or
embarrassing situations. Even reserved deities such as Erastil or Irori
often find themselves pulled into adventures by the irrepressibly friendly
goddess—whether they like it or not. Chaldira’s chief foe among the gods
is Thamir, an evil god venerated by desperate and misanthropic halflings.

19092635

19092635

4121812

AVATAR
When casting the avatar spell, a worshipper of Chaldira gains the
following additional abilities.
Chaldira Speed 70 feet, air walk, immune to immobilized; Melee [one-action]
shortsword (agile, finesse, reach 15 feet, versatile S), Damage 6d6+6
piercing; Ranged [one-action] fistful of buttons (nonlethal, range 120 feet),
Damage 6d6+3 bludgeoning

58

19092635

4121813

4121813

19092636

19092636


Ghlaunder
The Gossamer King
Areas of Concern infection, insects, parasites, and stagnation
Alignment CE (NE, CE)
Divine Font harm
Divine Ability Constitution or Wisdom
Divine Skill Nature
Domains air, decay, plague, swarm
Cleric Spells 1st: goblin pox, 2nd: vomit swarm (Pathfinder Advanced Player’s Guide),
3rd: insect form
Edicts corrupt pieces of land, water sources, and communities; infect the weak;
spread and nurture disease
Anathema aid in ending a plague or infection, destroy something out of hand when
you could have instead corrupted it or leeched off it first
Favored Weapon spear
Ghlaunder is the god of pestilence, infection, and insects. His form resembles
that of a giant mosquito, warped and distended by the parasites he hosts.
He leaves malaise in his wake, laying waste to everything he can. Ghlaunder
revels in suffering, especially that caused by sickness: the last gasp of air into
fluid-filled lungs, the terrorizing dreams that come only from the hottest of
fevers. It is said that the Gossamer King was once swaddled in a cocoon,
but was released by the curious Desna into the world with a cleave of her
starknife. Since then, the goddess has pursued him in a macabre dance,
hoping to kill him as they flit between planes.
Ghlaunder draws in those cast aside by their fellow kin. His priests
are survivors of virulent childhood illnesses that left them changed and
embittered, or those who have suffered gruesome tortures or terrible torments
at the hands of inexperienced healers and wish to subject others to the
same. He attracts misanthropes who wish to spread sickness, drawing from
ostracized lepers, those injured and infected in war, and those riddled with
pox. Ghlaunder tasks his followers with spreading sickness wherever they
go, whether via an illness that they carry themselves or a plague they
introduce by other means. Those who speak of him with reverence
do so in hushed tones, and their foes include the likes of doctors,
midwives, and followers of the goddess Desna.
The adoration of Ghlaunder’s acolytes is disturbing to witness.
They gather together away from prying eyes and wail to their
god, bringing him offerings of rancid meat and fetid bodies,
then infesting themselves with leeches and parasites.
Ghlaunder’s desires are clear: he wants nothing more than
to hear cries of anguish in the night when he hovers
in the sky, knowing those who
suffer below him are rotting
from the inside out.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121813

AVATAR
When casting the avatar spell,
a worshipper of Ghlaunder
gains the following additional
abilities.
Ghlaunder Speed 30 feet,
fly Speed 70 feet; Melee [one-action]
proboscis (agile, reach 20 feet),
Damage 6d6+6 piercing plus
3d6 persistent bleed

59

19092636

4121814

4121814


Grandmother Spider
The Weaver
Areas of Concern family, illusion, stories, twilight, weaving
Alignment N (NG, N, CG, CN)
Divine Font harm or heal
Divine Skill Crafting
Divine Ability Intelligence or Wisdom
Domains creation, fate, family, trickery
Alternate Domains change, darkness
Cleric Spells 1st: pest form, 2nd: web, 4th: glibness
Edicts be skilled and clever, think for yourself, take due payment for your work,
humiliate the powerful
Anathema abuse someone you have power over, harm someone who has given you
sincere kindness, let a slight go unanswered, own a slave
Favored Weapon bola (page 120)
Also known as Nana Anadi, Grandmother Spider began her existence as a
servant of the other gods, meant to weave fate and reality into existence.
Infuriated at her position as a lackey, she made fools of the greater gods
through mischief and disruption. She stole and copied Asmodeus’ keys,
resulting in widespread chaos, and pilfered some of Sarenrae’s fire, leading
numerous followers astray. Nimbly avoiding any retribution
for her antics, Grandmother Spider rewove the strands of fate
for herself, gaining her freedom. She regularly pleads with
her brother Achaekek to follow her lead and rebel against
the gods, and while he always refuses, seemingly indifferent,
Achaekek has on one notable occasion proven vengeful
toward those who harm his sister or her followers.
Due to the ongoing animosity of Asmodeus, worship of
Grandmother Spider is virtually unknown in Avistan. She
is traditionally revered in Garund and among anadi, whose
ancestors she led through the darkness and into freedom.
Temples are rarely dedicated to Grandmother Spider. Her places
of worship are instead typically schools and small roadside or
home shrines consisting of a spider
figurine, a loom, or a woven object.
Woven diamond shapes, patterned
after Grandmother Spider’s religious
symbol, can also be found tucked inside
the temples of other deities, especially those
belonging to the Ascended—those gods who were
once mortal.
Grandmother Spider emphasizes self-reliance, learning,
cunning, and caring for family and community. She is
intolerant of bullying and slavery and disdains inherited
hierarchy and titles.

19092637

19092637

4121814

AVATAR
When casting the avatar spell, a worshipper of
Grandmother Spider gains the following
additional abilities.
Grandmother Spider Speed 70
feet, climb Speed 70 feet, immune to
immobilized; Melee [one-action] leg (deadly 3d8,
finesse, reach 15 feet, versatile P), Damage 6d6+6
bludgeoning; Ranged [one-action] venom web (range 120 feet), Damage 6d6+3 poison

60

19092637

4121815

4121815

19092638

19092638


Groetus
God of the End Times
Areas of Concern apocalypse, empty places, oblivion, ruins
Alignment CN (CN, CE)
Divine Font harm
Divine Ability Strength or Charisma
Divine Skill Intimidation
Domains darkness, destruction, nightmares, void
Alternate Domains decay
Cleric Spells 1st: phantom pain, 5th: crushing despair, 9th: disjunction
Edicts preach of the upcoming end times, destroy that which has outlived its
usefulness, put the suffering out of their misery
Anathema artificially extend something’s existence or lifespan, spread hope
Favored Weapon war flail
Ancient beyond mortal reckoning, Groetus is an entity who cannot be easily
understood. He hangs in the sky above the Boneyard, a skull-faced moon
constantly observing the passage of the souls below. Events can cause him
to draw ominously closer to Pharasma’s Spire, or to retreat back to a safer
distance, with little obvious rhyme or reason for these actions. He evinces
little regard for anything but his singular aim: the dissolution of the universe.
While it may seem strange that a deity who seems to actively
disregard his worshippers continues to attract faithful followers,
Groetus is sought out with morbid fascination by those who
desire knowledge of the future. With perfect insight into the
final fate of the cosmos, Groetus is able to piece together
many of the horrifying possibilities of what is yet to come.
For those granted glimpses of such futures, the terrible
knowledge is often enough to permanently warp their
view of reality. Such unfortunate individuals are often
compelled to spread word of the coming triumph of
Groetus, warning all those who will listen that the
days of the universe are numbered. Groetus is also
venerated by those eager for the end of the world,
because they either see little value in the current
order, find it too painful to cope with reality, or believe
the universe is irredeemably flawed and must be
destroyed. Many of these followers are more eager for
destruction than Groetus himself, who reacts to events
that hasten and delay the end times alike with little more
than detached acknowledgment. The end is inevitable, and
Groetus is patient.
Groetus has no organized church. Most of his clergy are
solitary, wandering doomsayers, though some attach themselves to
war bands or teams of bandits and encourage such groups to spread
chaos. Those who feel themselves guided by the god work to fulfill the
conditions of obscure prophecies they feel will quicken the destruction of
reality and allow Groetus to close the book of the universe.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121815

AVATAR
When casting the avatar spell, a worshipper of Groetus gains the following
additional abilities.
Groetus Speed 70 feet, air walk, ignore difficult terrain and greater difficult
terrain; Melee [one-action] war flail (disarm, reach 15 feet, sweep, trip), Damage
6d10+6 bludgeoning; Ranged [one-action] dreadful thought (range 120 feet), Damage
6d6+3 mental

61

19092638

4121816

4121816


Gruhastha
The Keeper
Areas of Concern enlightenment, the Vudrani holy book
Alignment LG (LG, NG)
Divine Font heal
Divine Ability Intelligence or Wisdom
Divine Skill Society
Domains glyph, knowledge, perfection, truth
Alternate Domains nature, travel
Cleric Spells 1st: share lore (page 109); 2nd: comprehend language; 3rd: hypercognition
Edicts work toward collective transcendence, expose and root out malicious lies,
challenge oppression through education, protect knowledge, seek truth
Anathema deny a sincere student education, destroy knowledge,
disrespect the traditions of those around you, willfully spread
ignorance or wrong information
Favored Weapon shortbow
Gruhastha the Keeper is a deity of understanding,
peace, and the collective pursuit of enlightenment.
The once‑mortal nephew of Irori is believed to have
ascended to godhood himself after creating the holy
book Azvadeva Pujila, fully embodying all divine
wisdom within the text. Originating in Vudra, the
Keeper’s faith has slowly gained popularity in the
Inner Sea region, particularly in Jalmeray, where Irori
already has a wide following. Gruhastha manifests as
a human man with an idealized form, augmented with
wings of red and green plumage and a golden mandala
as a halo.
Gruhastha teaches compassion for all beings, and that
enlightenment is attained through knowledge guided by
wisdom and empathy. His priests and followers are dedicated
to educating others, yet recognize that they, too, are constantly
learning. They do not hold one culture’s teachings as superior
to another’s and seek to preserve and honor cultural traditions
wherever they go, as there are many valid paths to enlightenment.
In seeking knowledge, Gruhasthans work to understand, respect,
celebrate, and support everyone on their own personal journeys to
transcendence. Temples are open to all and maintain extensive libraries to
encourage multilingual literacy; books are often freely given and taken from
the Keeper’s shrines. Aware that it’s difficult to prioritize education or seek
transcendence when basic needs are unmet, the Keeper’s advocates work
to remove structural barriers and ensure everyone has access to the basic
comforts and tools they need to guide themselves toward enlightenment.
As Gruhasthans also practice nonviolence—though force is accepted
as necessary in some instances—champions of Gruhastha are rare.
However, clerics, paladins, redeemers, and all his followers share
the same commitment to truth, equity, and justice.

19092639

19092639

4121816

AVATAR
When casting the avatar spell, a worshipper of Gruhastha gains the
following additional abilities.
Gruhastha Speed 50 feet, fly Speed 70 feet; Melee [one-action] fist (agile,
finesse, nonlethal, reach 15 feet), Damage 6d6+6 bludgeoning;
Ranged [one-action] arrow of enlightenment (deadly 3d10, range increment
120 feet), Damage 6d6+3 piercing

62

19092639

4121817

4121817

19092640

19092640


Hei Feng
Duke of Thunder
Areas of Concern sea, storms, tengu, sailors
Alignment CN (CG, CN, CE)
Divine Font harm or heal
Divine Ability Constitution or Charisma
Divine Skill Performance
Domains air, indulgence, lightning, water
Alternate Domains destruction, travel
Cleric Spells 1st: gust of wind, 4th: hydraulic torrent, 6th: chain lightning
Edicts follow your passions, make token attempts to apologize to those you have
wronged, respect the power of the sea and sky, encourage flashy entertainment
Anathema fake friendship with those you despise, disrespect Hei Feng or Hei Feng’s
estranged wife Lady Jingxi, ignore an affront to you or Hei Feng
Weapon nine-ring sword (page 121)
Hei Feng, the tengu god of storms, is as unpredictable as the sea, as destructive as
a hurricane, and, more often than not, as drunk and foulmouthed as the sailors
who pray to him. Impulsive and passionate, his heart moves
between joy, sorrow, and anger in the time it takes him to finish
his cup, though whatever his mood, he rarely feels it lightly.
He may be so moved by a fisher’s prayer that he blesses
her with a catch large enough to feed her village, while
later unleashing torrential waves against that same
village for a slight. This unpredictability leads the rest of
the Heavenly Court to regard him as troublesome, and
mortals to view him with wary respect.
Though the Duke of Thunder is surprisingly
eloquent when the mood strikes, Hei Feng
has a keen distaste for etiquette and
sophistication. He loves street fairs, festivals,
and other raucous celebrations where
mortals gather—to the Duke of Thunder,
an unpolished street performer on a busy
intersection is a more vibrant show than
the finest theater could provide.
Hei Feng’s church has little formal
structure. Hei Fengan priests usually come
through in a crisis, but since they tend to be as
tempestuous as their deity, their presence can
be something of a mixed blessing. Hei Feng
is the patron of tengus (and himself takes the
form of a tengu with smoking black feathers).
His faith is seen mostly in Tian Xia, though
his worship has since spread across Golarion
and especially to the Shackles, where sailors and
tengu pirates pray for safe voyages between islands.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121817

AVATAR
When casting the avatar spell, a worshipper of Hei Feng gains the
following additional abilities.
Hei Feng Speed 70 feet, air walk, ignore difficult terrain and greater difficult
terrain; Melee [one-action] drunken sword (forceful, reach 15 feet), Damage 4d6+6
slashing plus 1d6 electricity splash damage; Ranged [one-action] storm surge (range
120 feet, air, water), Damage 4d6+3 bludgeoning plus 1d6 electricity splash
damage. The caster is immune to this splash damage.

63

19092640

4121818

4121818


Kazutal
Mother Jaguar
Areas of Concern safety, liberty, and community
Alignment NG (LG, NG, CG)
Divine Font heal
Divine Ability Strength or Wisdom
Divine Skill Society
Domains family, freedom, might, protection
Alternate Domains cities
Cleric Spells 1st: mage armor, 3rd: animal form, 4th: stoneskin
Edicts defend your people, provide for those who need you, oppose those who
unjustly lord power over others, demonstrate devotion to things you love
Anathema own a slave, force a creature to act against its will, refuse to give aid to
an ally, enforce an unjust law
Favored Weapon machete (page 120)
Kazutal, also known as Mother Jaguar or Lady Jaguar, is an old deity,
revered for thousands of years on the continent of Arcadia. Ages ago,
she was worshipped in the Razatlani Empire as a goddess of might and
protection in war. After the catastrophe of Earthfall, however, her edge
softened; those who struggled to put the world back together called
upon her to protect their neighbors and came together under her
guidance to build strong bonds of community and support.
Today Kazutal is worshipped throughout Arcadia as a deity
of community, liberty, and safety. Her churches support the
downtrodden and reinforce better ways to work alongside
one another for compassionate goals.
Clerics of Kazutal ask her for strength
so they can help those around them and
protect them from danger, enriching their
communities with civic pride and keeping
a sharp eye out for internal dangers and bad
actors among their flock. Warpriests of Kazutal
rely on the deadly edge of their machetes to
fight against corrupting and oppressive forces in
the world. Above all, Kazutal’s clergy preaches the
strength of love, both for other people and the cultures
they form, which gives followers the strength to fight without
compromise or weakness to protect those they hold dear.
Kazutal is largely unknown in the Inner Sea region. Over the
last few years, however, her clerics have ventured to Avistan
in response to contact from Chelaxian colonists near the
Arcadian city of Segada. Kazutal’s teachings of liberty and
safety rapidly attracted a number of former slaves after the
recent abolitionist success in Absalom, and her emphasis on
community brought many of these disparate people together
into a political bloc during a crucial time. Other churches
of Kazutal are found in Garund, particularly in Senghor and
other cities where merchants have traded with Arcadia.

19092641

19092641

4121818

AVATAR
When casting the avatar spell, a worshipper of Kazutal
gains the following additional abilities.
Kazutal Speed 60 feet, ignore difficult terrain; Melee [one-action] machete (agile, reach
15 feet), Damage 6d6+6 slashing; Ranged [one-action] jaguar pounce (range 60 feet);
Damage 5d6+3 piercing plus 1d6 persistent bleed

64

19092641

4121819

4121819

19092642

19092642


Kurgess
The Strong Man
Areas of Concern healthy competition, sport, and physical development
Alignment NG (LG, NG, N, CG)
Divine Font heal
Divine Ability Strength or Constitution
Divine Skill Athletics
Domains ambition, might, truth, zeal
Cleric Spells 1st: ant haul, 2nd: enlarge, 3rd: haste
Edicts compete to your full potential, claim victory or accept defeat with grace,
seek always to better yourself, encourage others to strive toward their own
potential for greatness
Anathema cheat at honorable contests, dishonor those who have lost or failed
(including defeated or slain enemies), engage in reckless or needless destruction
or bloodshed
Favored Weapon javelin

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX

Once a mortal farm boy from Taldor who had
superhuman strength from youth, Kurgess’s
selfless sacrifice on the field of competition
heralded his rise to godhood. Known as the Strong
Man, Kurgess stands as both champion and shining
example to those who seek athletic achievement and
to give their all in competition, regardless of whether
they are victorious or not.
Whether they’re priests or lay believers, Kurgessans believe that strength
of body and strength of character are the twin pillars that flank the gates
of Nirvana, and most train tirelessly to achieve these ideals. Worshippers
of Kurgess revel in their strength, eager to show off; this is motivated less
by pride, however, than by a desire to inspire others to strive for their own
potential. While the teachings of Kurgess emphasize physicality, wizards
and other students of magic occasionally find inspiration in the Strong
Man’s example, delving into the study of magic with the same zeal more
traditional worshippers apply to physical exercises. Some spellcasters
believe that keeping one’s body in good shape helps keep one’s mind just
as sharp, and they actively seek to bolster their physical prowess as part of
their path toward developing their mental acuity and endurance. Regardless
of their methods, Kurgessans are commonly jovial and encouraging, even
to their rivals, and their companions often cannot help but be inspired by
their enthusiasm.
While Kurgessans are willing to demonstrate their strength in combat,
especially to protect others or defend their ideals, followers of the Strong
Man take no pleasure in mortal combat or the deaths of even the direst of
enemies. By and large a light-hearted lot, Kurgessans prefer training, games,
and friendly competition to war and bloody conflict. When the need arises,
however, Kurgessans can be found on the front lines of combat, and heroic
orders such as the Knights of Lastwall often count Kurgessan champions
among their ranks.

INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121819

AVATAR
When casting the avatar spell, a worshipper of Kurgess gains the
following additional abilities.
Kurgess Speed 70 feet, climb Speed 50 feet, swim Speed 50 feet, immune
to immobilized; Melee [one-action] lashing chain (disarm, reach 20 feet,
trip), Damage 6d6+6 bludgeoning; Ranged [one-action] javelin (range
increment 60 feet, thrown), Damage 6d6+3 piercing

65

19092642

4121820

4121820


Milani
The Everbloom
Areas of Concern devotion, hope, and uprisings
Alignment CG (NG, CG, CN)
Divine Font heal
Divine Ability Strength or Wisdom
Divine Skill Society
Domains change, destruction, freedom, zeal
Cleric Spells 1st: mage armor, 3rd: enthrall, 4th: fire shield
Edicts confront oppression in all its forms, defend the common folk,
overcome despair to seize victory
Anathema abandon those in need, enslave or oppress others, harm the
innocent through direct or inadvertent action
Favored Weapon morningstar
Milani is the patron mother of those who war against oppression,
rewarding those willing to sacrifice their lives and use whatever
tools are available to fight for those who cannot defend themselves,
especially people who have been captured or enslaved.
Throughout Golarion, Milani is also known as the
Everbloom, as the symbol of her church is a beautiful
rose growing from blood-soaked soil.
Milani’s church is organized into independent,
clandestine cells of freedom fighters, rather than
into traditional structures. Clerics of Milani
often own or work in subtle businesses or
organizations cleverly designed as fronts
to cover their efforts to cleanse a region
of oppressors and liberate those who
have been enslaved or victimized. As
a subtle tell to other Milanites of the
structure’s true intent, these buildings
usually feature a small rose garden
or other rose iconography. One of the
most famous and oldest of these safe
havens is an inn in Absalom known
as the Sanguine Thorn, which served
as a staging point for hundreds of
successful liberation attempts in the
area. While most believe the tavern
was destroyed in the earthquake that
devastated Absalom’s Precipice District,
rumors circulate about a traveling wagon
caravan that secretly uses the tavern’s name
to refer to the collective of Milanites who
travel with it, moving from place to place
undermining persecution in all its forms and
fighting for freedom at all costs.

19092643

19092643

4121820

AVATAR
When casting the avatar spell, a worshipper of Milani
gains the following additional abilities.
Milani Speed 50 feet, fly Speed 70 feet; shield (15 Hardness,
can’t be damaged); Melee [one-action]
morningstar (versatile P, reach 15
feet), Damage 6d8+6 bludgeoning

66

19092643

4121821

4121821

19092644

19092644


Nivi Rhombodazzle
The Grey Polychrome
Areas of Concern gambling, gems, gnomes, stealth
Alignment N (LN, NG, N, CN)
Divine Font harm or heal
Divine Ability Dexterity or Intelligence
Divine Skill Stealth
Domains family, luck, trickery, wealth
Alternate Domains confidence, earth
Cleric Spells 1st: illusory disguise, 2nd: invisibility, 4th: private sanctum
Edicts take risks and savor the consequences whether good or ill, use stealth and
guile over violence when dealing with the fallout from your risk-taking, learn the
rules and strategies of games of chance played wherever you travel
Anathema break the established rules or terms of a wager, use violence to avoid the
consequences of a wager
Favored Weapon light hammer

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX

Goddess of gems, stealth, and gambling, Nivi Rhombodazzle is the
ultimate high roller, said to have won her divinity from the dwarven
god Torag in exchange for a gemstone. She was once a mortal
gnome who loved the thrill of an exciting wager, up to and
including the moment when the dice turned against her. Eventually,
Nivi’s debts grew too great for her to remain in her surface home,
and she fled into the depths of the Darklands to evade the wrath of
her creditors. Most of her adventures in the lightless lands are lost to
time and history, but she ultimately emerged reborn as a goddess,
hailed as the first of the svirfneblin—uncanny underground gnomes
with unique magical abilities and immunity to the dread Bleaching, a
wasting curse that claims the lives of gnomes who succumb to boredom
and ennui.
Nivi’s church appeals most strongly to the svirfneblin of the Darklands,
but many gnomes who live upon the surface believe the goddess’s tenets
can protect them from the wasting effects of the Bleaching. Nivi is not
exclusively a gnome deity, however, and she welcomes the worship of
any risk-taker who is willing to roll the dice and let them fall where they
may. Once Nivi’s worship is established in an area, it often spreads quite
quickly, particularly amongst gnomes. While it’s unclear whether or not
Nivi actually has any direct ability to protect gnomes who worship her
from the Bleaching, her faith’s encouragement of gambling and risky
behaviors serves as a potent inoculation against boredom and ennui. Even
those not subject to the Bleaching often find Nivi’s faith to be entertaining,
at the very least.
Nivi’s temples tend to serve dual roles, acting both as places of worship
and shelters in times of dangers. Such temples always have secret tunnels,
hidden rooms, or other escape routes to ensure that there is always a safe exit
from the temple in case its inhabitants become trapped within. Most of her
temples and shrines are built into inconspicuous locales, such as basements
of shops and gambling halls—the latter are particularly common gathering
sites for her faithful.

INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121821

AVATAR
When casting the avatar spell, a worshipper of Nivi Rhombodazzle
gains the following additional abilities.
Nivi Rhombodazzle Speed 50 feet, burrow Speed 30 feet, immune
to immobilized; Melee [one-action] returning light hammer (agile, thrown
40 feet), Damage 6d6+6 bludgeoning

67

19092644

4121822

4121822


Nocticula
The Redeemer Queen
Areas of Concern artists, exiles, midnight
Alignment CN (N, CG, CN)
Divine Font heal
Divine Skill Society
Divine Ability Dexterity or Charisma
Domains change, creation, darkness, travel
Cleric Spells 1st: penumbral shroud (page 109), 3rd: nondetection, 4th: creation
Edicts create art true to yourself, protect marginalized artists, punish those who
take advantage of offered trust and shelter
Anathema deny shelter to the desperate, destroy harmless art you dislike, finish a
work of art during daylight hours
Favored Weapon dagger
For most of her existence, Nocticula was a patron of assassins
and succubi, a demon lord feared by other demon lords for her
skill at assassinating the competition. Those days are behind
Nocticula, for she has risen to the role of the Redeemer
Queen, a patron of marginalized artists and protector of
those cast out from society. She is now feared among
her former peers for her persuasive words that tempt
them away from their place in the Abyss and toward
redemption. Her faith is strongest in the eastern
reaches of New Thassilon, where her most
powerful exile, Queen Sorshen, seeks to build a
nation that welcomes those whom others have
cast out.
Nocticula dwells in a remote archipelago
known as Midnight’s Palette. She
encourages her worshippers to welcome
pilgrims, refugees, and strangers; those
who seek to abuse these open borders are
counted as the greatest enemies of the
church. Nocticula teaches forgiveness
and encourages her followers to give their
foes opportunities to repent, but rescind
mercy from those who take advantage.
Creating art—whether it’s sculpture or
painting, song or story, public performance
or private display—is important to the faith, but just
as important is the protection of art and the artists who
create. Nocticula teaches that the most important art
is that which challenges you, compels you
to look at the world in a different way, or
threatens your comfort, for it is through the
change enabled by such art that one can grow.

19092645

19092645

4121822

AVATAR
When casting the avatar spell, a worshipper of
Nocticula gains the following additional abilities.
Nocticula Speed 70 feet, fly Speed 70 feet; Melee [one-action]
tail stinger (agile, finesse, reach 15 feet, trip), Damage
6d6+6 slashing; Ranged [one-action] magnanimous
smile (nonlethal, range 120 feet, visual),
Damage 6d6+3 mental

68

19092645

4121823

4121823

19092646

19092646


Sivanah
The Seventh Veil
Areas of Concern illusions, mysteries, reflections, secrets
Alignment N (LN, NG, N, NE, CN)
Divine Font harm or heal
Divine Ability Wisdom or Charisma
Divine Skill Deception
Domains delirium, magic, secrecy, trickery
Alternate Domains glyph
Cleric Spells 1st: illusory disguise, 4th: veil, 5th: shadow siphon
Edicts show the beauty in illusions, pursue the nature of truth, respect the need
for secrets
Anathema use illusions and shadows to harm another creature, reveal a secret you
have sworn to keep
Favored Weapon bladed scarf (page 120)
No ancient record reveals the truth of Sivanah’s origins; in fact, only recent
documents record her existence at all. The Seventh Veil is widely regarded as
the goddess of illusion magic, often portrayed as a figure disguised by seven
veils. Legends state that each face underneath the first six of her seven veils
is of a different ancestry—human, elf, halfling, gnome, anadi, and naga—
but the seventh face is never shown, believed to mask the goddess’s
true form. Some theologians believe Sivanah hails from the Shadow
Plane, though the goddess’s true nature and form continue to be
topics of debate. Even her female visage, while agreed upon by her
followers, could likewise be an illusion. Her goals are hidden from
even her most faithful, which some believe to have hampered the
faith’s growth and influence beyond the level of a cult.
Sivanah is well loved by gnomes, who believe the goddess
embodies a playful dance between illusion and reality. Gnomes who
are drawn to magic and illusions are especially likely to pay their
respects to Sivanah, and some wear knotted scarves to honor the
goddess of illusions. Anadis are also sometimes drawn to Sivanah,
though there is some contention among religious scholars over
whether Sivanah’s fifth veil truly obscures an anadi or some other
being known for its mastery of illusion, as older legends claim the
fifth veil concealed a cyclops. Outside of gnomes and anadi, Sivanah
draws those who benefit from hiding their appearance or intentions,
whether they’re illusionists or thieves, or simply wish to live and
present a different lifestyle than the one they currently have.
The Seventh Veil safeguards those who plead for secrecy,
especially those in disguise for their safety. As the goddess of
reflections, Sivanah employs mirrors, reflections in water, and even
sometimes shadows to connect with her most faithful. She has a
rivalry with Zon-Kuthon, loathing the dark god’s corruption of
shadows, and she sometimes uses her influence to cause darkness to
act unexpectedly for the Midnight Lord’s clerics.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121823

AVATAR
When casting the avatar spell, a worshipper of Sivanah gains the
following additional abilities.
Sivanah Speed 70 feet, air walk, ignore difficult terrain and
greater difficult terrain; Melee [one-action] bladed scarf (disarm,
finesse, reach 15 feet, trip), Damage 6d8+6 slashing;
Ranged [one-action] illusory assault (range 120 feet), Damage
6d6+3 mental

69

19092646

4121824

4121824


Shizuru
The Empress of Heaven
Areas of Concern ancestors, honor, the sun, and swordplay
Alignment LG (LG, LN, NG)
Divine Font heal
Divine Ability Strength or Wisdom
Divine Skill Society
Domains duty, perfection, sun, vigil
Alternate Domains sorrow
Cleric Spells 1st: true strike, 4th: reflective scales (page 109), 5th: summon dragon
Edicts practice with a weapon every day, honor your ancestors, protect nature and
society from corruption and destruction
Anathema abandon a companion in need, dishonor yourself, parlay with truce
breakers, separate lovers
Favored Weapon katana
The Empress of Heaven is worshipped across all of Tian Xia by people of all
walks of life, from commoner to lord, farmer to samurai, human to dragon.
She is revered as the ruler of the Tian pantheon, respected as the
finest samurai in Heaven or Golarion, and honored as the patron
of nature and emperors alike. Perhaps the most famous tale about
her is that of Shizuru and her lover Tsukiyo, the moon god.
After Tsukiyo was slain by his brother Fumeiyoshi in
a fit of jealousy, Shizuru brought the moon god back to
life with the aid of Qi Zhong, the god of medicine. Sadly,
Tsukiyo was deeply affected by his experience with death,
and though he and Shizuru still love each other, the event created
a rift between them. Even so, on the days of an eclipse, they embrace as one.
Followers of Shizuru lead structured lives. Their dedication to duty is nigh
absolute, both to fulfill their responsibilities to earth and Heaven and to
distract from the personal sorrows they often share with their goddess. To
better dedicate themselves to their cause, many Shizurans are emotionally
reserved, preferring to lead lives distant from others. Even so, many of
Shizuru’s priests earn the respect of the communities in or near which they
reside, with locals calling upon these priests to aid in times of danger. Her
most devout worshippers take up swordplay as both a practical tool of battle
and a means to hone the mind and body. Many liken this to the practices of
Iomedae’s clergy, even going so far as treat the two deities as sister goddesses,
though Shizuru’s faithful prefer diplomacy to battle and pray for peaceful
days instead of glorious war. All the same, followers of Shizuru consider
themselves allies of Iomedae, as the Empress of Heaven holds a half-concealed
fondness for the younger and more idealistic goddess.
Though Shizuru is mainly worshipped in Tian Xia, especially in the
nation of Minkai and other Tian-Min nations, Tian immigrants to Brevoy,
Mendev, and Varisia have brought their worship with them. These
immigrants often treat their faith as a connection to their homelands,
paying homage to the Empress of Heaven as a way of honoring their
ancestors and heritage.

19092647

19092647

4121824

AVATAR
When casting the avatar spell, a worshipper of Shizuru gains the following
additional abilities.
Shizuru Speed 70 feet, air walk, ignore difficult terrain and greater difficult
terrain; Melee [one-action] katana (deadly 3d8, two-hand d10, reach 15 feet, versatile
P), Damage 6d6+6 slashing; Ranged [one-action] sunbolt arrow (range 120 feet),
Damage 6d6+3 fire

70

19092647

4121825

4121825

19092648

19092648


Tsukiyo
Prince of the Moon
Areas of Concern jade, the moon, spirits
Alignment LG (LG, LN, NG, N, CG)
Divine Font heal
Divine Ability Constitution or Intelligence
Divine Skill Occultism
Domains delirium, moon, repose, souls
Alternate Domains change
Cleric Spells 1st: soothe, 2nd: mirror image, 5th: hallucination
Edicts provide aid and counsel without judgment to those who seek help,
help the dead find their rest, amplify or help speak for the powerless
and demonized
Anathema harm another out of envy, force aid on those
who do not want it, inflict harmful mental effects on
others as punishment
Favored Weapon spear
The surface of Golarion’s moon is marred with a great
scar, and the people of Tian Xia say this is where Tsukiyo,
the Prince of the Moon, was struck down by his envious
brother Fumeiyoshi. When his lover Shizuru found him the
next morning, her tears mixed with his blood to create
the first pieces of jade. Shizuru brought him to Qi Zhong,
the god of medicine, who resurrected
him; but his experience on the other
side changed him from a boisterous
and carefree soul to a thoughtful and
temperamental one. He now sees the world
differently from most—something that has
strained his relationships and made it difficult for
him to relate to others, but has also allowed him to
offer his understanding and quiet comfort to those who
are lost, demonized, or misunderstood.
Tsukiyo has found a great following among those whom
society shuns or strikes down for their differences,
particularly those with mental illnesses or disabilities.
Though his church primarily operates in Tian Xia,
followers of Tsukiyo tend to be wanderers by nature
and can be found anywhere in the world. In particular,
Tian immigrants established a strong following in
Ustalav and Varisia. Members of Tsukiyo’s clergy tend to
take up the role of wandering counselors, offering wisdom,
guidance, and therapy to those in need wherever they go, and
they are welcomed in almost any community for their services.
When engaging with those with mental illness or disability, priests
of Tsukiyo prefer to offer assistance by teaching communities to
respect and celebrate these individuals. Tsukiyan priests never attempt to
treat these individuals unless they desire such assistance.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121825

AVATAR
When casting the avatar spell, a worshipper of Tsukiyo gains the following
additional abilities.
Tsukiyo Speed 70 feet, air walk, ignore difficult terrain and greater difficult
terrain; Melee [one-action] longspear (reach 20 feet), Damage 6d10+6 piercing; Ranged [one-action]
moonbeam (nonlethal, range 120 feet, silver), Damage 6d6+3 mental

71

19092648

4121826

4121826


Demigods and Other Divinities

19092649

19092649

Away from the temple districts of major cities, places
of pilgrimage, and mass celebrations of holidays and
religious festivals, smaller cults, cabals, and sects
pursue their own rites and codes of conduct across the
Inner Sea and beyond. While many faithful primarily
worship more mainstream and well-known deities,
others dedicate themselves to less conventional paths
of devotion. This calling from a higher power comes
in many forms, whether it’s the potent voice of the
fey embodied in the Eldest of the First World; the raw
power of fire, air, earth, and water exemplified by the
elemental lords; or even paragons of the aligned outer
planes such as empyreal lords, archdevils, and monitor
demigods. Some mortals even worship the inscrutable
and incomprehensible entities from beyond reality
known as the Outer Gods, extraordinarily powerful
beings that are nonetheless so alien to mortalkind
that their followings’ impact fills a similar niche to the
worship of demigods.
Though rarely invested with the full strength of a
true god, some powerful, unique extraplanar creatures
nevertheless carry a spark of the divine that empowers
their followers to perform miracles and call upon divine
aid in times of need. To the everyday resident of the Inner
Sea, such a difference in power is largely academic, as
the only ones with the strength to subdue or even slay
such a being are largely gods themselves, or figures of
myth and legend. These entities are collectively referred

4121826

to as “demigods.” Some demigods are children of the
true gods, others are mortals who have achieved a spark
of divinity that allows them to influence the world
much like other traditional deities, and still others are
powerful divine servitors. Regardless of their origin or
true nature, the term has expanded over time to include
any of the myriad of powerful entities from the Great
Beyond who take an interest in Golarion and answer
the prayers of their followers, from divine entities who
truly went through a sort of ascension to exemplars of
already powerful types of outsiders.
Many demigods are allied with or directly serve
other gods, such as the fealty owed to Asmodeus
by the archdevils of Hell, but their divinity is not
granted to them by their allied deities. The source of
these demigods’ power is a matter of ongoing debate
among scholars; some theorize that demigods siphon
off power from the gods related to their own concerns,
while others posit that these demigods are fragments of
true deities or concepts given life, and argue that their
power may come from the Great Beyond itself. Some
particularly fanatical philosophers, largely focused
on the study of the Outer Gods and the Great Old
Ones, insist that demigods like the Great Old Ones are
instead the pale shadows of even greater powers that
exist outside of the fabric of the Great Beyond itself,
though such theories have very little evidence beyond
the musings of these individuals.

72

19092649

4121827

4121827


GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

19092650

19092650

4121827

Worshippers of these demigods have many motivations
in pursuing their faith beyond the mainstream gods of
the Inner Sea. Many worship demigods for the more
narrowly defined concepts and beliefs they represent
relative to the gods. A paladin devoted to crusading
against the evil influence of devils and demons might
don the crimson and gold of the empyreal lord
Ragathiel, favoring his gospel of vengeance over
Iomedae’s more idealistic view of the battle between
good and evil, while a particularly greedy aristocrat
might choose the archdevil Mammon as a patron out
of a specific belief in the power of money to perpetuate
power, rather than Asmodeus’s more general portfolio
of power and control.
Others may have cultural attachments to a particular
demigod through particular relevance to an ancestry
or locale, such as the widespread worship of Kabriri
among ghouls and ghasts, the veneration that many
fey offer to the Eldest in acknowledgment of the
demigods’ power over the First World, and Nurgal’s
influence in the deserts of Golarion due to his mastery
over the unforgiving sun. Many of these faiths live
on through countless decades or centuries, passed on
from generation to generation, even in places where
more mainstream faiths are prevalent. Some even see
these lesser-known demigods as faster or easier paths
to power, prestige, or wealth than the avenues available
to worshippers of the true gods, through either greater

affinity with their tenets or the smaller and potentially
less entrenched structure of their clergy. Regardless of
their reasons, the faith of a demigod worshipper is no
less real than any other. Demigods inspire the same
fervor and depth of belief as any other deity, and a
flame strike spell cast by a follower of Kerkamoth burns
just as hot as one from a follower of Sarenrae, though
such abilities may have different appearances between
different faiths.
The following pages describe many of the demigods
whose followers can be found in the Inner Sea region.
Many more demigods exist than are detailed here,
including ones whose worship is common in other
parts of Golarion, demigods who have ascended from
obscure types of planar beings rarely encountered on
Golarion, beings of lesser power with very limited
presences in Golarion, and those that have fully
devoted their attentions to other planes altogether.
Additionally, the ranks of the demigods are constantly
changing as their jockeying for power—their alliances,
betrayals, and competitions with one another—
and the distant but ever-present possibility of true
apotheosis lead to realignments, declines in stature,
and occasional deaths that reverberate through the
fabric of the Great Beyond.
The entries that follow provide details on these
demigods and Outer Gods, and statistics for their
worship can be found in the tables on pages 124–133.

73

19092650

4121828

4121828


Archdevils and
Queens of the Night
The eight archdevils are the rulers of the first eight levels of
Hell, while Asmodeus himself oversees Nessus, the ninth.
The Queens of the Night, conversely, have traditionally
been shut out of Hell’s hierarchical patriarchies. In
response, they have spent ages building up networks and
power structures that transcend any one layer of Hell.
All ultimately serve Hell and the Prince of Darkness, and
though their schemes further their own goals, they also
further the might of the infernal realm as a whole.

Each archdevil holds uncontested rule over one of the
first eight realms of Hell. Statistics for their worship
appear on page 124.

Baalzebul
Baalzebul was one of the first angels of Heaven, a glorious
lieutenant who followed Asmodeus in his exodus to Hell.
In this new realm, he led the infernal armies and trained
several other archdevils as generals. When Asmodeus
divided the nine realms of Hell between himself and the eight
archdevils, Baalzebul protested, thinking he had earned a
place at his god’s side. Asmodeus responded by stripping
away the archdevil’s radiant form, reducing him to a figure
composed of swarming flies. Now known as the Lord of
Flies, he rules over Cocytus, the frozen seventh
layer of Hell, and attracts followers possessed of
deep ambition and a powerful drive to triumph.

Barbatos
Barbatos is the youngest of the archdevils,
and in fact is not truly a devil at all. His true nature
remains unknown and perpetually cloaked, but when he
appeared at Hell’s gates bearing the souls of an entire
mortal world and transformed them into Hell’s first
legion of barbazus as an offering, the Prince of Darkness
saw fit to grant Barbatos rulership over Hell’s first layer,
Avernus. As Hell’s doorwarden, Barbatos oversees the
spaces between worlds, and his followers are those
who tread such interstitial paths and hold no
qualms about the ethics of their journeys.

19092651

19092651

ARCHDEVILS

4121828

Belial
The lord of Hell’s fourth layer, Phlegethon, is Belial.
The Pale Kiss was created by Asmodeus as an object
of adoration, with perfect form and beauty in the
eyes of every creature. As a result, Belial has a
virtually unlimited malleability of form, shifting
between shapes almost constantly. His appearance
is often as dualistic as his personality: half his body
beautiful and half grotesque, much as he revels equally in
pleasure and pain. As he is a creature of carnal desires, so
are his followers: those who crave forbidden pleasures
of the flesh but hide behind masks of respectability.

Dispater
MAMMON

Hell’s second layer is the Infernal City, Dis, and its
ruler is the archdevil Dispater. The Iron Lord is
the architect of the orderly perfection of Hell as a
blueprint for the rest of the multiverse, responsible
for Dis’s own dark and startling perfection. He remains
distant from the scheming and machinations of the other

74

19092651

4121829

4121829

19092652

19092652


archdevils and the Material Plane, instead modeling calm
and deliberate action combined with ruthless, merciless
arrogance. As the most urbane of the archdevils, he
attracts many followers among those who wish to see
Hell’s dark majesty spread across the universe.

QUEENS OF THE NIGHT

Geryon

When mortals were young, before Asmodeus conquered
Hell, Ardad Lili was already manipulating amorous and
lustful mortals to swear fealty to her, amassing power
from their souls. She fled the realm of Nirvana during the
Exodus, taking up residence in Avernus and continuing to
gather an army of damned souls and female devils who
share her ambitions. The Serpent Muse has never forgotten
the censures and cruel insults spewed by the other natives
of Nirvana, and she seeks to someday rule not a layer
of Hell, but a realm of the heavens. Herself a passionate
being, she draws similarly passionate followers.

Once the mightiest of asura ranas, Geryon betrayed
hundreds of Hell’s original asura inhabitants to aid
Asmodeus in claiming the plane, in the process earning
himself the title the Source of Lies. His realm of Stygia,
Hell’s fifth layer, hews most closely to the nature of Hell
before Asmodeus reshaped the plane, and it contains the
sunken ruins of countless cities and libraries predating
the war against Heaven. The archdevil hoards knowledge
and secrets—especially that which has been forbidden—
while spreading falsehoods and heresies to mislead the
ignorant, and his followers revel in the same.

Mammon

The Queens of the Night have won their own measure
of power in Hell. Statistics for their worship appear on
page 132.

GODS &
MAGIC

Ardad Lili

OVERVIEW

Doloras

Mammon, the Grasping One, oversees the vast treasuries
of Hell secured in the vaults of Erebus, Hell’s third layer.
As his angelic form was slain, he has no form of his own,
so instead he infuses the very wealth that he guards, taking
forms composed of riches and extending his senses out
through each nigh-uncountable coin—he knows well the
exact sum held in Hell’s vaults and the greatest treasures
among them. His worshippers are the greedy rich and poor
alike, and he often arranges for such mortals to stumble
across a “lucky copper” through which he whispers
encouragements for the bearer to indulge in greater and
greater vices, eventually claiming their soul as his own.

Perhaps the cruelest of Hell’s divinities, the Sadistic
Angel shares certain characteristics with the velstracs
who once resided in Hell—most notably, a drive to inflict
physical pain upon living creatures. She does not inflict
her torments out of anger or retribution; she practices
her art with an unparalleled detachment and absence of
emotion. Her followers are sadists, torturers who relish
their grisly work, and those diabolists who summon
velstracs rather than devils. While she bears the title of
Queen of the Night and commands power commensurate
with the others, Our Lady in Pain is content with her
station and holds no ambitions beyond ensuring she can
continue her tortures uninterrupted.

Mephistopheles

Eiseth

The archdevil Mephistopheles was shaped of the ashes
and fire of Hell itself to convey the plane’s will. The lord
of Caina, Hell’s eighth layer, he is a conniving schemer
and a brilliant politician, quick to offer insults both
blatant and cloaked behind silvered words. A master of
rule, law, and words, he is the creator of the renowned
agreements known as infernal contracts, crafted to damn
mortal souls through their own ambitions. He views
mortals as nothing more than a source of power for the
infernal realm, but he nevertheless has followers who
share his affinity for the power of law and loophole.

Hell’s Valkyrie rules a domain spanning part of Dispater’s
realm, commanding her legions of erinyes and executioner
devil soldiers as she sees fit. Eiseth operates outside
Dispater’s rule, and she has forged powerful alliances
with those in Hell and beyond, having long ago rejected
limitations placed upon her by others. Foremost among
the Queens of the Night, she embodies battle, revenge,
and wrath, and her ambitions are as lofty as her aerie of
Widow’s Cry, where she forges souls of the damned into
unequaled infernal legions answering to her alone.

Moloch

While the other Queens of the Night are all fallen celestials,
Mahathallah was once among the most powerful of the
monitors: a psychopomp usher in service of Pharasma.
Granted a glimpse of the end of her own existence,
Mahathallah fled to the pits of Hell, finding some form
of solace in Asmodeus’s counsel. Now the Dowager of
Illusions, Mahathallah deals in death, fate, and vanity,
pulling back the veils of lies that obscure the profound
facts of existence. She teaches her followers to seek the
truths underlying each falsehood, fomenting arrogance
and callousness in them. She also serves as a distant,
deliberate advisor to the other Queens of the Night.

The general of Hell’s armies, Moloch, embodies infernal
discipline and incomparable destructive power. Across his
ream of Malebolge, the sixth layer of Hell, the Ashen Bull
trains countless legions of devils to wage unending war.
He not only teaches obedience, but demands it, punishing
even the slightest misstep or insurrection with immediate,
fiery retribution. Despite his harsh nature, Moloch is the
most widely worshipped of the archdevils among mortals,
as he is the most likely to answer supplicants’ mundane
pleas. In exchange, he asks only their souls to add to his
endless armies—a price many are willing to pay.

GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121829

Mahathallah

75

19092652

4121830

4121830


Demon Lords
The Outer Rifts of the Abyss consist of unending layers
of evil and depravity, many of which are ruled over by
powerful, unique fiends known as demon lords. These
demigods have risen above their peers through strength,
cunning, or an unmatched capacity for cruelty, overseeing
innumerable lesser demons that serve, fear, and revile
them. Beneath them, yet more demons clamor to attain
their heights of power as nascent demon lords, waiting
for the right opportunity to complete their ascension.
Fortunately for the mortals of the world, while the ranks
of the demon lords are numerous beyond comprehension,
only a small subset have so intensely turned their baleful
gazes toward Golarion as to have a presence on the planet.
These demon lords are served by vile cults that commit
atrocities and blasphemies in exchange for power, wealth,
and the opportunity to indulge their hearts’ darkest
desires. Statistics for their worship begin on page 124.

19092653

19092653

ABRAXAS
Abraxas, the Master of the Final Incantation, is the
demon lord of forbidden lore, magic, and snakes. Abraxas
has an encyclopedic knowledge of magical formulas and
destructive secrets, favoring those that inflict suffering
and destruction. His Final Incantation is a word of power
that can unravel the mightiest of spells and unmake even
artifacts. He takes the form of a viper‑legged humanoid
with a fanged, deformed bird’s head. Abraxas’s cults are
most prevalent among the drow of Golarion, but small
circles devoted to him can be found in most major cities
on the surface as well.

BAPHOMET
Baphomet, Lord of the Labyrinth, is the demon lord of
beasts, labyrinths, and minotaurs. Baphomet was originally
a consort of Lamashtu who achieved demon lord status
after escaping from imprisonment in a labyrinth constructed
by Asmodeus. Baphomet appears as an enormous
emaciated minotaur with feathered wings and a
goat-like head that bears three horns, as well
as a blazing pentagram branded into his
forehead. Baphomet’s cults are among the
most prolific in Golarion—human-dominated
secret societies devoted to the demon
lord are present in many cities and
may have members ensconced
in positions of political power,
while most minotaurs prefer his
patronage to that of Lamashtu.

4121830

CYTH-V’SUG
Cyth-V’sug, Prince of the Blasted
Heath, is the demon lord of
disease, fungus, and parasites.
Originally a qlippoth lord, he
was exiled by his peers for
accepting mortal worshippers.
Transformed into one of
the demons he despises,
Cyth-V’sug seeks to devour all
life to put an end to demons and,
ultimately, himself. He most often
appears as an enormous draconic figure
of snarled vines, fungal growths, and
flailing tentacles. Cyth-V’sug is most often
worshipped by recluses who seek to bring
decay and destruction to their environs, though
denizens of the Darklands also pay homage to him.

CYTH-V’SUG

DAGON
Dagon, the Shadow in the Sea, is the demon lord of
deformity, the sea, and sea monsters. He holds court
in an infinite ocean covered in disconcerting islands
and deep-sea trenches filled with incomprehensible

76

19092653

4121831

4121831

19092654

19092654


sunken cities. He appears as a massive creature with
the lower body of an eel, a head reminiscent of deep-sea
predators, and four thrashing tentacles in place of arms.
Dagon began as a qlippoth, and no mortal understands
his transformation into a demon lord, though it earned
him the enmity of his former kin. Dagon is primarily
worshipped by boggards, sahuagin, skum, and marsh
giants, though desperate or depraved coastal villages have
been known to pledge themselves to the demon lord.

GOGUNTA
Gogunta, Song of the Swamp, is the demon lord
of amphibians, boggards, and swamps. Gogunta is
worshipped as a goddess by boggards, who believe her to
be an ascended mobogo, though scholars suspect she was
a former hezrou who gained the favor of Dagon. Lending
credence to this latter theory, her realm, a stinking salt
marsh, is located within Dagon’s oceanic realm. Gogunta
appears as an enormous, multi-headed frog with dozens
of eyes and even more tongues, though boggards typically
depict her as a titanic boggard queen.

two pairs of bird wings, a scorpion tail, and an avian
demonic head. He is worshipped by harpies, other evil
winged creatures, and by countless champions and
clerics who fell from grace at his temptations.

SHAX
Shax, the Blood Marquis, is the demon lord of envy,
lies, and sadistic murders. Shax’s capacity for cruelty is
legendary even among the ranks of demon lords, and he
takes extreme pleasure in watching the last light of hope
fade from the eyes of his victims. He is the original creator
of the babau demons, and those whom he personally flays
and corrupts with Abyssal influence remain exemplars of
their kind. Shax appears as a human man with a dove’s
head, feet, and wings, carrying countless knives and
other weapons all over his body. Shax is most frequently
worshipped by sadists, lone murderers, and serial killers.

TREERAZER

Kabriri, Him Who Gnaws, is the demon lord of ghouls,
graves, and secrets kept by the dead. According to
legend, Kabriri is the reborn form of the first humanoid
to devour his kin in life. His realm, Everglut, is connected
to graveyards throughout the multiverse by a snarled
network of tunnels that bring knowledge and sacrifices
to the demon lord. Kabriri appears as a hulking ghoul
with elven ears, teeth filed to points, an unnaturally long
tongue, ashen skin, and cloven hooves. He is worshipped
primarily by ghouls, ghasts, and lacedons.

Treerazer, the Lord of the Blasted Tarn, is a nascent
demon lord of pollution and the corruption of nature,
believed by many to be an exiled servant or spawn of
Cyth-V’sug who was banished to Golarion after a failed
attempt at supplanting the demon lord. Though Treerazer
is a nascent demon lord, and thus lacks the power of a
true demon lord, he is perhaps most noteworthy among
those who have a stake in Golarion due to his physical
presence within the Tanglebriar, a corrupted, fetid swamp
that was once the southern edges of the elven nation of
Kyonin. He is served by devoted cultists in and around
Kyonin, though small pockets of believers can be found
around Golarion working furtively to free him in hopes
of gaining his favor upon his ascension.

NURGAL

ZEVGAVIZEB

Nurgal, the Shining Scourge, is the demon lord of deserts,
senseless warfare, and the sun. He was formerly a fully
fledged deity of ancient Azlant, but fell to demigodhood
after being defeated in combat. Nurgal represents
the sun’s potential for devastation, and his followers
venerate him out of cowed awe. The demon lord appears
as a muscular, tanned man with the head and lower body
of a golden lion and a dragon’s tail. He is almost always
depicted as wielding a mace in the form of a miniature
sun, held in a taloned hand. Nurgal’s worshippers are
primarily found in the deserts of Garund, Ninshabur,
and Qadira.

Zevgavizeb, the Glutton in the Dark, is the demon lord of
caverns, reptiles, and troglodytes. He dwells at the center
of a massive network of caverns called Gluttondark,
filled with continually warring nations of reptilian races,
along with other, more hideous subterranean creatures.
He encourages these conflicts to cull the weakest of his
followers and devours all life found within defeated
nations as a price for failure. Largely concerned with these
perpetual conflicts, Zevgavizeb seldom seeks to influence
Golarion directly, though reptilian races and xulgaths in
particular routinely commit atrocities in his name.

PAZUZU

Zura, the Vampire Queen, is the demon lord of blood,
cannibalism, and vampires. According to legend, she is the
reincarnated form of an Azlanti queen who indulged in
blood rites and acts of cannibalism in a quest for eternal
life. After death, she was reborn as a unique vampiric
succubus who quickly ascended to the status of demon
lord. Though many of her cults died out with the Azlanti
empire, Zura is still worshipped by vampires and those
aspiring to become vampires, particularly within Cheliax
and Ustalav, as well as among the drow of the Darklands.

KABRIRI

Pazuzu, King of the Wind Demons, is the demon lord
of the sky, temptation, and winged creatures. He counts
himself among the most ancient of demon lords, though
his constant warring with Lamashtu has hindered his
accumulation of power to the point of denying him
godhood. He is exceptionally active in meddling in
mortal affairs and takes great pleasure in possessing
and corrupting good-hearted folk who invoke his name.
Pazuzu appears as a humanoid figure with eagle’s talons,

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121831

ZURA

77

19092654

4121832

4121832


The Eldest
When the gods abandoned the First World—their initial
rough draft of creation shaped in distant prehistory—
native beings of incredible power stepped in to fill the
vacuum. These beings, called the Eldest, hold deific
power over the First World but have little of the other
gods’ aspirations. The Eldest don’t concern themselves
with expanding their followings or advocating particular
ideologies. Many barely acknowledge their worshippers
at all, concerning themselves only with their own
mysterious motivations and doling out divine power
merely because they have much to spare and doing so
amuses them.
Devotees of the Eldest on Golarion are usually
solitary in their worship, residing near breaches to the
unpredictable First World. Most worshippers are fey or
gnomes, although other creatures who feel a close kinship
with fey might revere the capricious and uncaring Eldest
as well. Statistics for their worship appear on page 126.

COUNT RANALC
Once the lord of darkness and of the chaos of creation,
Count Ranalc was cast out long ago by the other
Eldest and titled “the Traitor,” though the Eldest are
not forthcoming about what heinous treachery Ranalc
committed, and many among his worshippers claim
that he was the one who was betrayed. In his new
home in a remote corner of the Shadow Plane, Ranalc
embraced his banishment and became the patron of
exiles, shadows, betrayal, and the betrayed. Ranalc had
long held a fascination with the world of Golarion, and
he was alternately both friend and foil to the powerful
archwizard Nex. On the day Nex besieged the city of
Absalom with shadowy beings—beings certainly drawn
from Ranalc’s domain—the Eldest vanished from reality.
Although he continues to grant spells to his devout
worshippers, Ranalc has otherwise wholly disappeared.
Theories about his disappearance abound, although they
are as obscure and as self‑contradictory as the enigmatic
Eldest ever was.

19092655

19092655

World and beyond. This information fuels her intrigues
among the Eldest, and they all believe it wisest to keep
on the Green Mother’s good side lest their secrets be
seductively whispered into the ears of their enemies.

IMBREX
Known as the Twins, Imbrex is the mysterious Eldest of
twins, statues, and endings. Appearing as two immense
stone statues hundreds of feet tall holding hands and
looking outward, Imbrex neither moves nor speaks. The
Eldest sometimes communicates with telepathic utterances
that rend minds or deliver psychic enlightenment, but
they more often express their will through startlingly
realistic dreams that sometimes manifest into strange
life. An entire city named Anophaeus sprawls at Imbrex’s
four feet, populated by jaded urbanites, eager aspirants,
and prowling dream‑creatures made real. An unusually
high proportion of those born in Anophaeu are twins,
and twins are also common among Imbrex’s worshippers.
Although Imbrex appears timeless in form, they are
intrigued by dramatic endings, particularly apocalypses,
and have foreknowledge of disasters to come.

THE LANTERN KING
Although the Lantern King most often appears as a
floating ball of light surrounded by runes that form
a delicate crown, the Eldest of laughter, mischief, and
transformation has taken on a dizzying array of figures.
He often adopts alternate shapes to play pranks, and
even other Eldest are not immune to his mischievous
scheming. Although he insists his pranks are intended
only to incite levity and bring down imperious snobs, the
chaos he creates in the name of good-natured fun is, to
his targets, embarrassing at best and sometimes outright
lethal. The Lantern King wanders the First World more
than other Eldest, and he can be encountered in crowded
markets and lonely byways alike. He is frequently
accompanied by the Witchmarket, a traveling caravan of
entertainers and merchants that serves as his court.

THE GREEN MOTHER

THE LOST PRINCE

The Eldest of carnivorous plants, intrigue, and
seduction, the Green Mother personifies the raw thrill
and desire found throughout nature. Lush plants that
entice prey only to kill with barbs or toxins lie within
her authority, as do lustful acts and whispered secrets
occurring in wild terrain. Her seductive form shifts from
that of a beautiful fey such as nymphs to incorporating
natural lures like sweet-smelling flowers and graceful
verdant tresses. Just as the Green Mother’s form
constantly changes, her mood shifts from suggestive
temptress to indifferent poisoner. No matter her form
or attitude, the Green Mother is among the canniest of
the Eldest, and she maintains several loyal agents who
keep her well informed about goings-on in the First

The Eldest of loneliness, sadness, and forgotten things, the
Lost Prince spends most of his time brooding in the throne
room of his crumbling tower. Although his precise origin
is a hotly debated issue, the Lost Prince is known to hail
from a place other than the First World. The melancholy
lord doesn’t speak of his home­, and in fact he doesn’t
speak much at all, as he’s prone to bouts of depression
powerful enough to leach color from his surroundings
and press his coterie of followers into respectful silence.
Appearing as a gaunt, pale human man dressed in black
finery, the Lost Prince bears vivid red runes on his brow
and on the backs of his hands. He is studiously neutral in
the schemes of the other Eldest, which makes his opinions
and his favor particularly valuable.

4121832

78

19092655

4121833

4121833

19092656

19092656


MAGDH

SHYKA

Magdh is the Eldest of foreknowledge, complexity,
and triplets, and she is the greatest seer in the First
World. Most often appearing as a woman with three
faces set equidistantly around her head, Magdh looks
across the skeins of fate into myriad alternate realities
and possible futures. Among all the Eldest, she has the
deepest knowledge of reality’s true design and the ripples
a single action or inaction can create throughout all of
existence. Her communications are veiled in conditional
language and oddly juxtaposed statements to an almost
maddening degree, and thus she never communicates
the prophetic truths she sees—so plain to her six
eyes—in a straightforward way. Because of their shared
knowledge of branching timelines, Shyka and Magdh
can communicate more easily with each other about
such topics, though the other Eldest are cautious around
Magdh, lest a careless comment or errant gesture cause
her to predict apocalyptic dooms.

The Eldest of entropy, reincarnation, and time, Shyka the
Many is not a single entity but rather multiple beings
who travel forward and backward through time. Each
has sequentially held the title of Shyka, picking up the
mantle and the knowledge that comes with it upon
the passing (or disappearance) of a predecessor. Shyka
visits so many overlapping temporal locations that other
creatures encounter a random-seeming Shyka each time.
This Eldest knows of the multiverse’s birth as well as its
death, having experienced both. Although Shyka claims
to merely watch over the continuum of time, it’s an open
secret that the Eldest makes slight changes in line with
their own goals—or requests that their worshippers do
so, with abstruse promptings.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

NG
Rumors say that to glance upon the hooded face of Ng is
to either see truth or face oblivion itself, but the Eldest of
changing seasons, secrets, and wanderers keeps his visage
perpetually shrouded. He is a serious and stern
figure draped in silvery robes that swish around
his legs as he walks lonely and distant paths.
No carefree wanderer, Ng is a patron of those
who travel long distances with purpose, and
he sometimes shields them from banditry,
treacherous weather, and getting lost. Ng
keeps many secrets, even from his followers,
and none know what his evidently aimless
travels might portend. Ng rules over the
seasons as they turn one into another,
but he rules far more numerous
seasons than the four familiar to
Golarion, such as the Season of
Carnivorous Light and the Season
of Solemn Deliquescence.

4121833

RAGADAHN
As boastful as he is bestial,
Ragadahn the Water Lord is
the Eldest of oceans, linnorms,
and sinuous spirals. He appears as
a great serpentine dragon in the First World’s
seas, but he is widely traveled and takes other
forms as needed to pursue both martial conquests
and amorous affairs. He is widely believed to be
the progenitor of all linnorms, and he claims to be the
progenitor of all dragons. True dragons stridently contest
this assertion, although they wisely decline to do so when
in Ragadahn’s majestic presence. Failure to deliver proper
respect to the arrogant Ragadahn invites his legendary
ire, and no supplicant can ever be too flattering for his
tastes. Yet for all his tempestuous nature, he is wise, and
he holds much otherwise lost and forgotten knowledge.

RAGADAHN

79

19092656

4121834

4121834


Elemental Lords
Born amid the primal chaos of the multiverse’s earliest
days, the eight elemental lords are divine embodiments of
the Inner Spheres’ raw elemental forces. With two lords of
air, two of earth, two of fire, and two of water, half their
number represent the aspects of each element that mortals
consider benevolent, while the others represent the
malicious and destructive aspects of those same elements.
When the Material Plane was born, the benevolent
elemental lords seeded it with all the potential of their
elements, creating planets, stars, oceans, and life. Yet as
mortality evolved, it began harnessing the elements for
malevolent purposes, causing anguished dissent between
the benevolent elemental lords and emboldening their
evil counterparts. Kelizandri, the fearsome lord of water,
forged an alliance with the other evil elemental lords—
Ayrzul, Hshurha, and Ymeri—to seal each good elemental
lord in a prison penetrable only by combining the other
three elemental powers once more­
; this feat has been
achieved only once in the ages since. The four surviving
lords have ruled their respective planes mercilessly for
time uncounted, free to write the stories of their own
creations, invent their own titles of nobility, and claim
sole dominion over the elemental planes. Statistics for the
elemental lords’ worship begin on page 126.
19092657

19092657

ATREIA
Responsible for fire, purification, and radiance, Atreia
the Lambent King is the benevolent elemental lord of fire.
When the multiverse was young, Atreia soared across
the Plane of Fire as a triple-headed ibis, with wings that
burned and eyes of flame, routing evil from the plane.
Now, he is imprisoned within the Garnet Brand, a red
gem encased in an eternal shroud of steam. Though he
cannot hear or grant power to his followers from his
prison, some groups of salamanders on the Plane of
Fire still honor the Lambent King for his dominion over
protection and life-giving fire, as do a few small circles of
mortals who hold the discovery and purification of evil
above all other causes. Statues depicting his likeness can
be found across his former realms, hidden in ancient sites
dedicated to healing and holy light.

AYRZUL
Lord of buried secrets, earth, and metal, the Fossilized
King Ayrzul is a mystery even on the Plane of Earth.
No one has seen the elemental lord of earth outside
of his realm, the Blistering Labyrinth, and few know
the truth of Ayrzul’s nature or the form he takes
when he appears. Some say he is an immense, undead
crystalline dragon, an ancient genie wizard,
or even a discarded splinter from some
long-forgotten deity, shed before their
primeval destruction. His power,
motives, and origins are likewise the
subjects of innumerable rumors. This
speculation is all inconsequential
to the Fossilized King; even
the politics of his plane falls
outside his notice. Instead, the
lord of Earth spends his time
plotting against his bitter
rival, Ymeri, the elemental
lord of fire.
Ayrzul’s followers include
xiomorns—Sairazul’s children
whom he has stolen—a handful
of mephits and other elementals,
and groups of humanoids on the
Material Plane with an interest in
the unseen hostility of the earth.

4121834

HSHURHA

RANGINORI

Hshurha, Duchess of All Winds,
is the elemental lord of air, last
breaths, and windstorms. She rules
the Plane of Air from her translucent
palace, Verglas
Precessional,
surrounded by her court of air
elementals, planar dignitaries,
and favored guests. The Duchess

80

19092657

4121835

4121835

19092658

19092658


is naturally invisible, and her true form—if she even
has such a thing—is a mystery. Cruel and tyrannical,
Hshurha enjoys toying with outsiders in her realm, and
she is known to be especially vicious toward creatures
with solid forms. She creates and destroys magnificent
ice and dust sculptures according to her tumultuous
whims, and her machinations often seem convoluted and
nonsensical, even to her inner circle. Most on the plane
both respect and fear her.
The lord of air is worshipped by air elementals as a
mother goddess, by invisible stalkers, and by cultists who
enjoy catering to capricious whims and unpredictable
storms. Despite her cool peace with djinn, some believe
she consorts with efreet or uses her invisible stalkers to
weaken the djinn’s hold on her plane.

KELIZANDRI
Kelizandri, the elemental lord of water, oversees the
deep sea, waves, and drowning. The Brackish Emperor
claims to be the offspring of an ancient god and a brine
dragon, and he usually takes the form of an immense
aquatic dragon with metallic scales and crystalline
talons. He spends much of his time slumbering in his
magnificent Palace of Salt and Bones, entertaining
himself with rampages of wanton destruction and
conquest whenever he wakes.
Kelizandri’s worshippers include brine dragons, water
elementals, and mortals who revere the inhospitable
unknowns of the deep sea. He holds no love for marids,
having killed the last Saline Padishah, Niloufar the Great,
and destroyed her capital city of Arzanib. The lord’s
domain on the Plane of Water is the Brackish Empire
Kelizandrika, a conglomeration of affiliated brine
dragon–controlled realms. The most powerful dragons
of Kelizandrika’s ruling councils are said to advise the
elemental lord personally.

LYSIANASSA
Lysianassa, Empress of the Torrent, is the elemental lord
of currents, tides, and water. Before she was trapped
in the Gasping Pearl, the benevolent lord of water
patrolled her plane as a powerful sailfish made of coral
and streaked with mother of pearl. When she realized
her capture was imminent, Lysianassa preserved the last
of her strength within the Breath of Lysianassa, a vial
that allowed her nautilus servant Riam the Unyielding to
control the Plane of Water’s tides. Since Riam’s death, the
currents of the Plane of Water have begun to slow, and
may eventually come to a halt. Few recall the Empress of
the Torrent’s name, but cults dedicated to an enigmatic
figure called the Queen of the Depths have begun to
arise, heralding an event they refer to as the Awakening,
and some planar scholars believe these cultists seek to
free Lysianassa from her prison.

RANGINORI
The benevolent elemental lord of air is Ranginori,
the Zephyrous Prince, lord of air, welcome breezes,

and thunderstorms. When he appears before mortals,
Ranginori takes the form of an immense, lion-headed
serpent spun from forbidding clouds, with hundreds
of clawed feet and a mane that dances with lightning.
Recently freed from his imprisonment within the
Untouchable Opal by agents of the Pathfinder Society,
the Zephyrous Prince has accumulated a small but loyal
following in search of liberation, hope, and change for
the multiverse. He is regaining his strength and preparing
to find and liberate the other benevolent elemental lords,
bringing balance back to the Elemental Planes.
As the single free benevolent elemental lord,
Ranginori is in a vulnerable situation, in desperate need
of allies and followers to aid him against the combined
might of the evil elemental lords. He has reestablished
his realm on the Plane of Air: the Roaring Spark, a
floating spiral of ruins that branch outward from a
central crack of thunder. As the elemental lord regains
his power and his domain returns to life, the vestiges of
his ancient keeps and towers rebuild themselves while
new branches form.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

SAIRAZUL
Sairazul, the Crystalline Queen, is the elemental lord
of caves, earth, and gems. Planar scholars who know
of the benevolent lord of earth speak of Sairazul as a
mother and creator who gave birth to numerous races
of outsiders, including agrawghs and xiomorns. She is
currently imprisoned within the Moaning Diamond,
a pure gemstone encircled by eternally crying winds,
unable to contact the outside world. Several of her
consorts still live to this day, searching the planes for her
prison in the hopes that her release will usher in an era of
renewed creation across the Plane of Earth. Though the
Crystalline Queen can’t grant power of any kind to her
followers, a handful of her children on the Plane of Earth
remain faithful to their creator, and she is remembered
with great reverence by Material Plane cultists who exalt
creation and reproduction.

4121835

YMERI
The elemental lord of fire is Ymeri, Queen of the Inferno,
lord of fire, heat, and smoke. The sole ruler of the Plane
of Fire, Ymeri governs from her Auroric Palace, taking
the form of a six-armed reptilian centaur with burning
wings. She has systematically destroyed all record of her
birth and true origins, claiming to have always existed,
and she wages a never-ending war against the other
denizens of the Plane of Fire and against the shaitans of
the Plane of Earth.
Of all the elemental lords, Ymeri has the largest
following. Some mephits and most fire elementals revere
her, alongside some efreet and a few other creatures of
the Plane of Fire, though few salamanders honor her
name, and a covert order of efreeti known as the Secret
Fire is dedicated to opposing her rule. On Golarion, the
Queen of the Inferno is worshipped primarily by cabals
of fire wizards, arsonists, and red dragons.

81

19092658

4121836

4121836


Empyreal Lords
Much as demon lords and archdevils are the preeminent
incarnations of malice and sin, on the side of righteousness
stand the empyreal lords—exceptional beings that
represent the good in the myriad everyday actions of the
multiverse. Drawn from the most powerful ranks of the
celestial host, the multitudinous empyreal lords include
agathions, angels, archons, and azatas alike. Most of
these beings gained prominence as immortal champions
of virtue, though some are instead mortal paragons
who ascended, while others spontaneously formed from
exceptional deeds of good that echoed throughout the
planes. While all empyreal lords are dedicated to good,
their philosophies, interests, and personalities vary,
and they don’t always agree with one another.
Worship of the empyreal lords is not nearly as
widespread as that of the major deities, but it is still
surprisingly common. Most worship takes place
at small shrines, statues, or artifacts (such as the
sculpture known as the Mistress of Angels in
Magnimar), or simply through the doing
of deeds that reflect an empyreal lord’s
interest or beliefs. Centers of worship
like churches or cathedrals are extremely
uncommon. Most followers consider
worship to be an individual matter, and it
is rare to see a follower of any empyreal lord
proselytizing. However, adherents sometimes
congregate in small groups called mystery cults,
and some of these groups maintain small
temples. The city of Magnimar is home
to several mystery cults, as the Varisian
people have long held the empyreal lords
in high esteem. It is not uncommon for
mystery cultists to worship multiple
empyreal lords in various combinations,
or even all of them, though most have a
favorite patron.
Presented below are some of the
empyreal lords commonly worshipped
in the Inner Sea region. Statistics for their
worship appear on page 128.

19092659

19092659

ANDOLETTA
Called Grandmother Crow, Andoletta
represents
consolation,
respect,
and security. Andoletta makes a
clear distinction between guilt and
innocence: there is no in-between. For
those falsely accused or who show signs
of redemption, she offers a path back to
the light. That path is never an easy one,
but it is one worth walking, and she
stands beside those who make the trek.
For the truly wicked and those who show
no remorse, she has no mercy. For these

reasons, her likeness is often found in courts, where she
can watch over and ensure fairness to those accused of
crimes. Andoletta also places great value on respect for
the dead and the protection of children. To offer solace to
the bereaved is true kindness and compassion. Children
are slates with tremendous potential for good—if they
can be guided and kept safe from evil.
When she appears to mortals, Grandmother Crow
does so as an older woman, gray-haired, wrinkled, and
with keen, knowing eyes. She carries a walking stick
and wears a cape of black crow feathers across her
shoulders, giving the appearance of large, folded wings.
Those who appeal to Andoletta include elders, the
conflicted, the bereaved, the falsely accused,
investigators, and judges.

ARSHEA
Appearing in art more than any of
the other empyreal lords, the Spirit
of Abandon represents freedom,
physical beauty, and sexuality.
More than anything else, freedom
is what matters to Arshea. For
many this is most commonly seen
as freedom for sexual expression,
but Arshea represents the freedom
to experience all that is good in the
world, be it an ideology or a specific
emotional or physical expression. So
long as it doesn’t harm others, Arshea
believes creatures should do, think,
and feel as they will. They encourage
their followers to try new things, to think
in new ways, and to wear new forms.
When appearing to mortals, the Spirit of
Abandon most commonly appears in that
person’s own body so the person may see
how beautiful and perfect their own form
is—after all, if a divine being has chosen
to wear it, it must be perfect. For people
who don’t fit in the body they currently wear,
Arshea often appears in the form reflected in
their heart and soul. Followers of Arshea are a
varied lot, from artists to explorers, and from
lovers to those who fight against repression.

4121836

ASHAVA
Ashava, the True Spark, embodies moonlight,
dancing, and lonely spirits. Dancing is
Ashava’s true love, and she encourages her
followers to dance often. For some, she is
little more than a patron of that art,
ERITRICE
but Ashava is also a guide, both in
spirit and in the physical world. For
the living, she leads the lonely out of their difficult times,

82

19092659

4121837

4121837

19092660

19092660


her lights guiding lost wanderers back to safety. For the
dead, her haunting moonlit dances lead lost and lonely
spirits onward to their eternal judgment. She encourages
her followers to steer those who are lost—whether in
the wilderness or in their hearts—to where they need to
go. Priests of Ashava are the dancing light that guides
the way, but will-o’-wisps are anathema to Ashava, and
her followers destroy these creatures wherever they
are found.
The True Spark appears as a tall woman, flushed
with the exertion of prolonged dancing. Her features
are difficult to see unless under moonlight, when they
instead become crystal clear. She wears a beautiful gown
woven from starlight that always sways in motion, and
she never appears to be standing still. On her brow she
wears a wreath of many-colored moss. Some of Ashava’s
followers include dancers, artists, the nocturnal, the
lonely, the bereaved, lovers, and travelers.

BLACK BUTTERFLY
The Silence Between flutters among and between the
stars, representing distance, silence, and space. Often
called Desna’s Shadow, the Black Butterfly is sometimes
believed to be an aspect of Desna that has broken off
and taken on its own life; her interest in distance and
space certainly reflects Desna’s love of travel. The Black
Butterfly finds the silence of the sea of stars useful for
introspection and learning about oneself. Those who
follow her take opportunities when they can to sit in
silent meditation, in zones of silence and darkness when
possible. Travel across large distances offers plenty to
think about and contemplate, and the Black Butterfly
encourages such journeys. She hates all evil, but she truly
despises the powerful beings of evil that populate the
Dark Tapestry, and her followers are expected to fight
these beings and their followers without mercy.
The Silence Between manifests as the silhouette of a
woman with butterfly wings, and white hair and eyes.
Her wings contain a shadow—or reflection—of all of the
Dark Tapestry and everything within it. Parted lovers,
the isolated, the introverted, those who have sworn vows
of silence or don’t communicate verbally, stargazers,
explorers, and the melancholy are all found among the
followers of the Black Butterfly.

ERITRICE
The Heart-Speaker Eritrice represents honest debate,
opinions, and truth. Facts and information are
important to Eritrice, but truths and wisdom gained
through discussion are far more valuable to her than
those gained through books. She maintains there
is nothing wrong with disagreeing so long as the
disagreement is respectful, and that it is crucial to be
open to discussion, willing to consider new information,
and receptive to forming new opinions. Opinions are
valuable in that they help understand other views, but
Eritrice reminds her followers that opinions are not
facts and can be incorrect and even harmful. When lies

are spoken or become the rule of the land, those that
follow Eritrice work through networks of like-minded
individuals to spread the truth using messages sent to
all who will listen.
In her mortal form, the Heart-Speaker appears as a
muscular, 8-foot-tall woman with a female lion’s head.
She wears a rose-colored breastplate over a short
kilt. When she speaks, her voice is so entrancing and
compelling that those she appears to often don’t take
note of any of her other features. Those who value truth,
from debaters to town criers to lawmakers, are among
the followers of Eritrice.

FALAYNA
Femininity, martial training, and rings are the purview
of the Warrior’s Ring. In the eyes of Falayna, there is
as much grace and beauty in the martial arts as exists
in any culture’s definition of femininity. The strength of
womanhood is a hallmark of femininity, and strength
in arms reflects this, with the flourish and personality
of a fighting style a vibrant means for self-expression.
Followers of Falayna learn to fight so they can both
express their body and defend themselves if necessary,
and strive to feel beautiful doing so, both in form and
in dress. Falayna also enjoys rings, and as such she is
associated with events in which rings are given or
exchanged, such as weddings.
When the Warrior’s Ring appears to mortals, her form
is most often that of a muscular woman with the hair
and eye colors most commonly associated with feminine
beauty in the mortal’s mind. She wears a bright silver
breastplate on top of flowing, silken robes, her longsword
Betrothal sheathed across her back. On her fingers she
wears rings of varying colors, styles, and stones; this
jewelry seems to constantly shift, as if her fingers wear
all the rings found in all the worlds. Followers of Falayna
include warriors, soldiers, squires, jewelers, and those
engaged to be married.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121837

IREZ
Cards, glyphs, scribes, and spells are all the purview
of the Lady of Inscribed Wonder. She holds knowledge
and understanding of the great power and symbolism
behind runes. In particular, Irez understands how runes
can supplement and empower arcane magic. It’s through
this understanding that Irez is able to make enigmatic
predictions on events in the distant future, which more
often than not come to pass. Many of her followers
are calligraphers, gamblers, harrow readers and others
who regularly handle cards and symbols, be they for
an arcane purpose, prophetic practices, or their more
mundane applications.
Those who have seen Irez, either in person or through
the cards, describe her as a woman with the body of a
powerful serpent and large wings resembling those of a
bat. Irez is constantly draped with strips of parchment,
each bearing glyphs that bear the secret to a particular
spell or specific cards, such as the harrow’s Tyrant card.

83

19092660

4121838

4121838


KORADA
Korada, the Open Hand of Harmony, is concerned with
foresight, forgiveness, and peace. In particular, he believes
that although the tireless fight against wickedness is
admirable, the ultimate triumph over evil will come
in the form of redemption rather than destruction.
Korada’s dedication to peace is such that he and his
followers refuse to cause harm to their attackers, instead
using their martial skills only to defend themselves.
Many Koradans seek greater wisdom through study or
meditation in hopes of better understanding their foes so
as to guide them toward redemption. This dedication to
self-awareness, philosophy, and introspection is said to
have allowed Korada greater insight into the workings
of the universe, granting him the great gift of foresight.
Korada rarely acts on his visions, however, believing
the struggle that comes with true change is always
worthwhile, whether or not such a change is successful.
The Open Hand of Harmony takes the form of a lithe,
athletic man donning simple robes. He is covered in
sparse, light-brown fur and has three monkey tails that
constantly writhe behind him, much like the dancing
flames of a powerful fire. Most of Korada’s followers are
those who have lived imbalanced lives or faced persistent
violence as they seek to find peace in their life and within
themselves. Many of the evil individuals redeemed by
Koradans soon become followers themselves.

PULURA

19092661

19092661

Dancing through the northern sky, the Shimmering
Maiden represents constellations, homesickness,
and northern lights. Pulura understands that the
constellations are the guide with which mortals navigate
their world, lighting the way so that those who travel
or explore can always find their way home. The stories
of the constellations not only entertain with tales of
goodness and light and strength, but they are also a tool
for helping others learn and remember the stars. This
ensures that the map in the sky is easy to read and never
forgotten. To learn this map and to guide those who are
lost or otherwise in need of direction are exceptional
callings, but even more so is to teach a petitioner to
navigate the skies themself on the journey.
The Shimmering Maiden is often difficult to see,
appearing to mortals from great distances as a bright,
hot star. When she can be seen, she has the appearance
of a Tian woman whose dark hair twinkles with bright
stars. Her green and pink robes appear as though they are
made of light, rather than any fabric. Travelers, guides,
nomads, explorers, sailors, stargazers, and hunters are
some of Pulura’s followers.

RAGATHIEL
The General of Vengeance presides over chivalry, duty,
and vengeance, acting as the quintessential knight.
Born of the archdevil Dispater and Feronia, a neutral
demigoddess of fire, Ragathiel struggles to overcome
the reputation of his parentage, and he understands the

struggle to be accepted, to be trusted, and to fight against
his own nature for the sake of good. He represents
strength in battle, wrath upon the wicked, absolution or
vengeance for the wronged, leadership when needed, and
virtue and duty to the innocent. He expects his followers
to destroy fiends when they find them and to work
toward truly earning the trust and acceptance of those
around them. Those who follow him lead by shining
example and can be found on the front lines of battle or
any conflict against evil they can find.
The General of Vengeance appears as a massive
giant, standing more than 20 feet tall, clad in golden
plate armor that shines with its own light and carrying
a sword that burns with holy fire. Five flaming wings
stretch from his back, three on his left and two on his
right—the sixth was lost, torn out by his father in a
fit of fury. Followers of Ragathiel include crusaders,
knights, soldiers, the falsely accused, the marginalized,
and the wronged.

SORALYON
Guardians, monuments, and magic are the purview of
the Mystic Angel. Soralyon believes that monuments
and ruins are important links to the past. Guarding
them against those who would defile or destroy them is
of tremendous importance, lest people lose memories
of who they are, where they came from, and what they
have accomplished. As such, those who stand guard
over monuments and ruins are blessed. Likewise, those
who study monuments to the past and present with
respect, or seek to preserve them for the future, are
also blessed. Guardianship of others, but especially of
those who study and preserve these relics to the past,
is also of great importance to Soralyon. As magic is
a valuable tool in guarding, studying, and preserving
these monuments and people, Soralyon encourages
the study of magic, preferably for use in learning
or protection.
When the Mystic Angel appears to mortals he
usually does so as a handsome being beautifully
carved of smooth marble, the hues of which range the
entire spectrum of the stone but tend toward those
most common locally. Followers of Soralyon include
archaeologists, historians, bodyguards, guardians,
sculptors, curators, and arcane spellcasters.

4121838

VILDEIS
The Cardinal Martyr presides over devotion, sacrifice,
and scars. Vildeis is driven entirely by her abhorrence
for evil. Evil should not and must not be allowed to
exist. It should be fought without pause and without
rest until it is completely and utterly destroyed. Not
only does the fight never end, but every sacrifice that
needs to be made to end evil must be made, and is
worth making. There are no material rewards to be
had for destroying evil—its destruction is all the
reward necessary, and that reward can be enjoyed only
once there is no more evil. Scars are the marks the fight

84

19092661

4121839

4121839

19092662

19092662


leaves behind, the memory of all the sacrifices made.
Vildeis expects total commitment from her followers,
who leave everything behind and dedicate their lives
to destroying all that is vile.
The Cardinal Martyr appears as a human woman
covered in scars, each forming a rune depicting a sacrifice
she has made. Her eyes are covered in a red cloth so that
she cannot see the horrors of evil upon the world. Vildeis
flies on gigantic, blood-colored wings, and the whispered
screams of all the planes’ martyrs can be heard in her
presence. Followers of Vildeis include martyrs, paladins,
and zealots.

When appearing to her followers, Verity is always
practically dressed, usually wearing a tunic and
breeches. She wears black and white clothing, as these
colors represent the light of truth and the darkness of
obscurity and the unknown. She keeps her light-brown
hair pulled back in braids. On her back she has large
wings made of parchment that never wrinkle, whether
furled or unfurled. Followers of Zohls include detectives,
scientists, researchers, historians, archivists, librarians,
and even conspiracy theorists.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY

YLIMANCHA
Ylimancha gazes out over the world’s coastlines, presiding
over coastal waters, fishers, and flying creatures.
Also known as Harborwing, she believes in harmony
between the seas, the skies, and the beings of the land.
Sustenance and resources can be taken from the sea
by those on shore, but not so much that the balance is
upset. The sea may sometimes encroach on the land,
but breakwaters can be built to keep communities
on land dry and safe. Ylimancha likewise loves all
creatures that fly, though the demon lord Pazuzu also
claims dominion over them,
bringing the two into endless
conflict and causing her to
mourn deeply each creature he
converts to his worship.
Harborwing most often appears as a very large
seagull, pure white in color with the head of a Varisian
woman with short, dark hair. She sometimes instead
appears as a human woman with the head of an osprey.
In this form she wears robes that sway like the waves
of the sea, their blue folds foaming white at the edges,
and she carries a teak longbow strung with gold. When
she speaks, her voice carries the sound of the crashing
waves. Followers of Ylimancha include fishers, sailors,
merfolk, those who make their living on or in the
sea, and flying creatures.

CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121839

ZOHLS
Zohls, also known as Verity, advocates for
determination, investigation, and truth. She believes
that mysteries lead to truth, but how one arrives at that
truth is as important as the answer itself. All questions
are puzzles, and all puzzles are worth solving. The
more intricate the problem, the more rewarding the
investigation, and through determination and ethical
investigation, even the deepest of enigmas can be solved.
Calculated, logical thinking is more important to Zohls
than gut instinct. She sees patterns everywhere, and she
teaches that detecting these patterns brings the truth
to light. While all investigations are worth pursuing so
long as they don’t hurt innocents, investigations that
reveal the truth of crimes or other horrors, and that
lead to justice being served and victims finding peace,
are the most important of all to Verity.

PULURA

85

19092662

4121840

4121840


The Horsemen
At the end of the River Styx await the rulers of
Abaddon: the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse and
their daemonic brood. Hatred for living things fuels all
of daemonkind, who see existence as a great mistake.
Though all of the Horsemen began their lives as mortals,
they are completely devoted to the eradication of reality
itself. Riding atop their dreaded steeds, they strive for
true apocalypse. Only when all life has been snuffed
out does their mission end, and they can then consign
themselves to the waiting oblivion.
Only the truly nihilistic worship the Horsemen. Those
who seek vengeance on all the world or lust for power
are drawn to the Horsemen’s easy promises, thinking
they will be spared from their masters’ cataclysmic
mission. They never are. To the Horsemen, their
followers are entirely disposable, tools with a purpose
until they too are devoured. Statistics for their worship
begin on page 128.

APOLLYON
The Prince of Plagues seized power for himself after the
disappearance of the previous Horseman of Pestilence
by obsessively eliminating all potential rivals. Apollyon
commands his vast army of leukodaemons to spread
oblivion like a virus. He wastes no time on trivial acts
of violence and lacks the patience to wait for long‑term
schemes to come to fruition. Instead, his plagues carry
oblivion through cities like lightning, decimating
entire kingdoms in the span of a few days. His greatest
creations have been diseases that corrupt the soul itself,
ensuring that Pharasma sends his victims to Abaddon
once they’ve succumbed.
Apollyon appears as a hulking, bruised giant wrapped
in black leather straps, with the head of a rotting ram.
His cloak is stitched from the skin of angels who
attempted to rescue the souls he had claimed—after
flaying the angels alive, he preserved their faces in
permanent agony upon the cloak. Apollyon delights
in witnessing the deaths his diseases cause, not in
dispassionate obligation but out of self-righteous glee.
He sends his plague carriers out across the Material
Plane knowing that even if they are defeated quickly,
the sicknesses they carry will spread and take more lives
than they could ever hope to alone. The moans and
wails from the infected are prayers that fill him with
more power to launch his next sickness onto the living.
Apollyon spends most of his time on his Throne of
Flies, in a grotesque palace built long before his life as a
mortal from the corpse of an ancient being. He anxiously
amasses power against a fear he has never voiced—the
reappearance of his predecessor, whose fate remains a
mystery. Apollyon is always working, spreading his
influence farther and mutating his diseases to grasp those
who thought themselves inoculated. For Apollyon, the
only cure for existence is its end.

19092663

19092663

CHARON
The First Horseman, eldest of his counterparts and the
Boatman of the Styx, is a patient and cunning figure.
Content to allow plans to take hold over time, Charon
freely offers his power only to collect on his bargain
decades or even centuries later. As the Horseman of
Death, Charon concerns himself with miserable, pointless
deaths that are devoid of any faith, mercy, or meaning,
dragging those who perish in the depths of hopelessness
and nihilism down into Abaddon and oblivion.
Charon is the last surviving member of the original
Horsemen who overthrew the First Daemon in their
fit of jealous contempt. Holding knowledge from the
earliest days of existence, he alone knows Abaddon’s
true history, but he keeps it to himself. This allows him
to exploit opportunities with curious mortals, sweeping
more souls into his dread kingdom.
Charon appears as a tall, looming man dressed in a
frayed cloak and gripping a lantern staff firmly in one
hand, but it is widely believed that this form is a facade.
His true face may be unknowable, hidden away at the
end of the Styx within his sunken palace, the Drowning
Court. Some theorize that this form is nothing more than
a mouthpiece for a far more alien entity that lies beneath
the waters of the Styx. Whatever the case, Charon is a
timeless being whose bargains, promises, and bottomless
hunger stretch back to the earliest days.
Mortal attempts to extend their natural lifespans
provoke a cold anger in Charon. His daemon brood
confiscates magic and technology that would grant
respites from aging and delivers them to the Drowning
Court, filling vaults with artifacts of immortality. He
actively works to control the younger Horsemen to
ensure they present a unified front to the denizens
of Abaddon and beyond. Managing Szuriel’s tireless
bloodlust, Apollyon’s
festering
paranoia, and
Trelmarixian’s existential investigations occasionally
tests the Boatman’s patience, but Charon never forgets
that one day, all will find their way to his waters, and
he longs for the day he himself can drown under them.

4121840

SZURIEL
All Szuriel has ever known is war. In life she was first
a paladin, then excommunicated from her church for
heresy. In response, she slaughtered her way to power
until she was crowned empress, then subsequently had
every member of her former faith crucified. She went
on to wage several brutal wars against neighboring
kingdoms until an assassin’s dagger found her heart.
Sent to Abaddon, she rose quickly through the ranks
of daemonkind, and when she saw weakness in the
Horseman of War, she slew him in battle, claiming his
title for herself.
Szuriel appears as a tragic angel with beautiful golden
hair, magnificent wings, and polished obsidian eyes that

86

19092663

4121841

4121841

19092664

19092664


continuously weep blood. She resides in the Cinder
Furnace, her corner of Abaddon where instruments
of war are forged from the fires of burning souls.
Szuriel commands one of the largest standing armies
in all of existence, countless daemonic soldiers ready
to wage war. All fear oblivion at the hands of
Szuriel and her army. The Horseman of War is
always happy to lend her powers, warriors, and
devastating discoveries across the planes. So long
as war continues, more souls are pulled into her
ever‑burning furnace.
There are few lasting cults to Szuriel. She carries
a hatred of the gods from her mortal life, but she
recognizes religious strife is a wondrous provocation
to war. She sees her followers as entirely disposable,
allowing them to believe whatever they wish of her
so long as they deliver her souls on the ends of their
swords. She is symbol of pyrrhic victory, a mocking
lie to those promised an angelic reward in the afterlife
despite a lifetime of violence. Only oblivion awaits those
who serve the Angel of Desolation.

piece of himself within each of his daemonic servitors,
allowing him control over them. As a result, his psyche is
constantly deluged by voices from his servants, and only
with great focus can he hush them. Yet there is always a
single voice that cannot be silenced, the same
that spoke to him before his death. That voice
continues to speak to him, promising a future
of devastation still to come.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

TRELMARIXIAN
Before his mortal death, Trelmarixian had already
destroyed an entire world. Born a daemonic-blooded
tiefling, his hatred of those around him was an
all‑consuming hunger, and he never knew peace.
During an eclipse, he performed a ritual so powerful
it mummified every living creature on his world, and his
heart was finally full. Dying from starvation but elated
by his success, Trelmarixian heard a voice call out
to him. The voice mocked him, exclaiming all he’d
accomplished was insignificant compared to what
awaited him next. Trelmarixian’s last mortal memory
was of staring into an eclipse.
Lyutheria, the original Horseman of Famine,
was impressed by Trelmarixian’s conquest
and took him on as her apprentice, fatally
underestimating
his
ambitions. After
Trelmarixian learned all he could from his
master, he devoured her and assumed her title.
Trelmarixian appears as sickly man with three
snapping jackal heads and putrid, membranous
flesh that is constantly dripping and sloughing off
his body. As the Horseman of Famine, Trelmarixian
ushers in oblivion slowly, watching mortals waste
away as their bodies turn against them. He spreads
cancer by touch, inciting cells to rebellion, and his
breath causes outbreaks of hives and asthma attacks
in those nearby. He aligns himself with Szuriel to see
that soldiers never make it home to reap their fields,
leaving crops to rot on the vine. He collaborates with
Apollyon to spread diseases from livestock, rendering
butchers’ larders barren. Trelmarixian has little trust
for Charon, however, certain that the oldest Horseman
is hiding secrets.
Trelmarixian’s ambition was not sated by attaining
a revered place amongst the Horsemen. He buries a

4121841

SZURIEL

87

19092664

4121842

4121842


Monitor Demigods
While fiends exploit mortals’ baser natures and celestials
encourage their better selves, monitors are concerned
more with method than morality, from the rigid law
of aeons and inevitables to the pragmatic neutrality of
psychopomps, to the unpredictable chaos of proteans.
Rather than immersing themselves in issues of philosophy,
monitors take a more cosmic approach, battling each
other over universal laws, the planes, and reality itself.
Mortals worship monitor demigods just as they do
empyreal lords and fiendish demigods. Some are drawn
to the enigmatic Monad or primordial inevitables out
of a desire for control or the reassurance of an orderly
universe—often those in governance or academia.
Artists and bon vivants who seek the creativity and
freedom offered by the paragons of chaos revere protean
lords. While many assume worshippers of psychopomp
ushers to be morbid, that is rarely the case. Psychopomp
worship is also found among those who bring life into
the world, such as midwives and farmers, and those who
eschew idealism for more practical philosophies.

BARZAHK
Appearing as an enormous migratory bird—usually a
corvid, but sometimes a songbird—draped in robes and
carrying a tombstone lock and a giant bone key, Barzahk
the Passage is the psychopomp usher who maintains
the Dead Roads, the secret back routes between the
planes and the mortal world. Among mortals, they are
worshipped as a patron of compasses, travelers, and
vigils. Barzahk is tasked with transporting the souls of
those who die far from home to ensure that they reach
their proper destination. Unfortunately, Barzahk wanders
far and wide, and so they rarely attend to this duty. Thus
his followers, both psychopomps and mortals, take it
upon themselves to care for lost souls, both literal and
figurative. Like their patron, followers of Barzahk are
often migratory, helping those they find along the way.

KERKAMOTH
Also known as the Waiting Void, the unseen Kerkamoth
is the primordial inevitable of emptiness, entropy, and
stillness. Though many people view decay and
entropy as manifestations of chaos, followers of
Kerkamoth understand that in an orderly universe,
the end of one cycle makes way for the beginning
of a new cycle. These worshippers track such
transitions and work to properly dispose
of those things that have outlived their
usefulness, whether it’s cleaning a cluttered
closet or demolishing an old building. Yet,
Kerkamoth opposes those who destroy
with abandon and no greater purpose,
which often brings them in conflict with
daemons, demons, and proteans.
Though they favor areas of
emptiness and silence to
commune with their patron,
worshippers of Kerkamoth
recognize that these too
cannot last forever, inevitably to
be filled with new creations.

19092665

19092665

This section presents some of the best-known monitor
demigods. Statistics for their worship appear on page 130.

4121842

MONAD

MOTHER VULTURE

All aeons come from, return to, are
connected with, and are guided by the
Monad. The Condition of All is not a
deity in the traditional sense. It exists
both within and outside the multiverse
and has influence over the entirety
of existence. Though generally
content to allow the multiverse to
run its course, the Monad directs
its aeons to intervene when events

88

19092665

4121843

4121843

19092666

19092666


deviate from their ineffable design. Mortal scholars often
personify the Monad as the deity of creation, the infinite,
and truth. Even so, few worship it, and the Monad
pays very little attention to mortal petitioners. Instead,
scholars study and plot aeons’ actions, striving to discern
the Monad’s ultimate goal or to uncover universal truths
they can exploit for their own purposes. Only a rare few
mortals can master the asceticism necessary to connect
with the Monad, gaining hidden knowledge and powers
akin to those of other divine spellcasters.

MOTHER VULTURE
Though she usually appears as a blind young woman, in
her natural form the Flesheater is an enormous, bloated
creature with four wings and two long necks topped with
masked heads and gaping maws. Mother Vulture reflects
the dualistic process of decay. She is a vicious killer whose
feasts stain the ground, representing the death inherent
in decay, but also a thoughtful mother, representing
the new life that can take root in the fertile soil left
in the wake of destruction. Mother Vulture’s mortal
worshippers, who often dwell in deserts and swamps,
revere her as the patron of consumption, renewal, and
transformation. In this last aspect, she judges those souls
who sought redemption in life, deciding whether their
atonement was sufficient to avoid an undesired afterlife.

NARRISEMINEK
Called the Crownless and the Maker of Kings,
Narriseminek often appears as a protean with a scar
around their pate, as if left by a burning crown. Their
true form, though similar, is rarely seen: an iridescent and
golden protean with a halo of burning eyes but empty eye
sockets. The protean lord of ascendance, keketars, and
revelations rarely interacts with non-proteans, but to their
protean worshippers, they offer exalted transformations
and revelations that can change a being’s entire outlook.
Worshippers of Narriseminek, both mortal and protean,
spend their time divining the future and using magic to
transform their bodies—a practice they also extend to any
other willing creatures who ask. Their revelations take the
form of patterns emerging in otherwise random events;
Narriseminek’s followers reject astrology and other forms
of divination based on predictable cycles.

OTOLMENS
The primordial inevitable of machinery, math, and
physics, Otolmens the Universal is tasked with keeping
the galaxies, stars, planets, and other heavenly bodies
moving in their proper orbits. From her observatory
in the city-plane of Axis, Otolmens and her myriad
axiomite assistants track the motions of these objects
on the Material Plane. When an anomaly is discovered,
Otolmens dispatches inevitables to correct the problem.
A mechanical being with multiple heads and limbs,
Otolmens is said to spin like an orrery when in a flurry
of activity. Her mathematical precision is revered
by engineers and scientists, who form the core of

her worship. Most pray to her hoping to receive divine
inspiration or to stave off inaccurate calculations, but
she may call upon her more powerful worshippers to
fight threats to the very planet they inhabit.

SALOC
Ruler of the planar metropolis of Spire’s Edge in the
Boneyard, the psychopomp usher Saloc is humanoid,
but their face is devoid of features save stag horns, and
two golden rings lined with eyes constantly rotate about
their body. As a defense counsel in Pharasma’s court, the
Minder of Immortals argues that a person’s intentions
should be considered in equal part to the consequences
of their actions when deciding their soul’s afterlife.
Saloc has even been known to resurrect condemned
souls to give them a second chance to prove themselves.
Mortals revere Saloc as the patron of agency, bronze,
and education. These followers are people who seek to
improve themselves or others, including both students
and teachers. Some seek to earn their freedom from
earthly prisons, while others wish to change their ways
to avoid punishment in the hereafter.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

VALMALLOS
The Answering Rite is the primordial inevitable of
ceremonies, magic, and preparation. Valmallos takes the
form of a mechanical giant, his chest open to expose
a glowing heart, with scrolls swirling about him like
serpents. Valmallos understands all the laws of magic,
and sends his agents against those who have acquired
magical ability that they have neither earned nor have
the discipline to control. Many scholars of magic believe
Valmallos is at least partly responsible for the complex
material, somatic, and verbal components necessary to
perform magic. His followers are spellcasters who seek
perfection in the performance and effects of their magic.
Though willing to teach magic to others, they cloak their
techniques in layers of ritual to weed out those who lack
the patience to handle magic properly.

4121843

YDAJISK
The protean lord of language evolution, lost words,
and slang, Ydajisk manifests as a protean with six arms
and a cobra’s hood, surrounded by a cloud of drifting
sounds, symbols, shapes, and myriad other sensory
experiences that shift endlessly in and out of existence.
Closer inspection reveals that their body is made from
interlacing strands of poetic protean script. Ydajisk
is also called the Mother of Tongues, though like all
proteans, their gender changes as they will. Followers
of Ydajisk are wanderers, reviving dead languages from
ancient ruins, chronicling the dying tongues of cultures
in decline, and discovering or inventing new words.
All such knowledge acquired by agents of the Mother
of Tongues passes into Ydajisk’s realm, the Library of
Stolen Words, where it is transcribed into books or
stored in magical containers, alongside scrolls and tomes
considered long lost by mortal scholars.

89

19092666

4121844

4121844


Outer Gods & Great Old Ones
The Outer Gods, along with the Great Old Ones with
whom the Outer Gods are sometimes confused, are
ancient, inscrutable, cosmic beings. The Great Old
Ones are titanic monstrosities imprisoned since time
immemorial beneath the sea, deep within the world,
or on other planets, but the Outer Gods are even less
comprehensible. These unfathomable entities lurk
within the Dark Tapestry—the vast void between the
stars on the Material Plane—and dwarf other deities
just as those deities dwarf ordinary mortals.
To worship these gods is to acknowledge a cold truth:
the universe has no meaning. All the things mortal
civilizations hold dear—virtues, deities, great works—
are things those mortals have invented to distract them
from their own insignificance. History is a comforting
lie told because mortals are afraid of the dark. The
universe is immeasurably vast, beyond understanding,
and cares nothing for life. Ultimately, every creature is
alone, unmourned, and unloved. And because life has
no meaning or purpose, self-indulgence and nihilism are
the only rational responses. Statistics for worship of the
Outer Gods and Great Old Ones appear on page 130.

AZATHOTH
Azathoth is the Daemon Sultan and the Primal Chaos,
a roiling mass of destructive and transformative power
the size of a sun, dwelling in the darkness between the
stars, deep in the center of the universe. There, masked
from mortal sight by a veil of swirling colors, he is
surrounded by the other Outer Gods that make up his
court, dancing and cavorting about him endlessly, filling
the void with the sound of ghastly flutes. Azathoth is
utterly unaware of and uncaring toward those few who
have come to revere and worship him. It is precisely this
blind, uncaring nature that makes Azathoth the perfect
embodiment of a blind, uncaring universe. Azathoth’s
name, however, has great power over the Outer Gods
when properly invoked. He has also sometimes been
summoned by mortal priests—and though these
summons attract only a tiny sliver of his attention and
manifest as a form other than that of the Primal Chaos,
they nevertheless lead to destruction on a massive scale.
In his cosmic writhing, Azathoth sometimes
throws off seeds that travel through the cosmos as
malignant comets or meteors, until they finally crash
into a planet. There, they slowly gestate and spawn,
bringing cataclysmic ruin to the world. Azathoth is
also associated with the bizarre reptilian birds known
as shantaks; when a mortal foolishly tries to make a
shantak their mount but lacks the strength of will to
maintain control over the creature, the shantak flies
into the depths of space through means impossible to
quantify, bringing its hapless passenger to Azathoth’s
court for one final glimpse into the horrifying truth of
the universe.

19092667

19092667

HASTUR
Hastur is a Great Old One who, though confined to
the city of Carcosa on a planet orbiting a faraway star,
is nevertheless in the midst of a transformation into a
true Outer God. He works toward this feat through his
avatar, the King in Yellow, which can manifest anywhere
in the universe the light from Carcosa’s sun can be seen.
The King in Yellow appears as a humanoid figure draped
in yellow clothing, but there is nothing within the clothes
save a shapeless, horrifying presence. Hastur himself is
also referred to as Him Who Is Not To Be Named, or
simply the Unspeakable.
Self-indulgence and nihilism are at the heart of
Hastur’s worship, and he is popular among debauched
artists and nobles who recognize no purpose to life
other than gratifying their own increasingly grotesque
and outlandish tastes. Cults of Hastur are united in
their use of the Yellow Sign, a triskelion design that
allows Hastur to observe and possess those who gaze
upon it. The presence of the Yellow Sign among a
city’s graffiti is a foreboding indication that Hastur’s
attention has been drawn there, and these settlements
soon find themselves under attack either by Hastur
himself—who seeks to draw cities into Carcosa,
fueling his transformation into an Outer God—or by
Xhamen‑Dor, a parasitic deity spawned by Hastur as he
walked Carcosa’s sewers.

4121844

NHIMBALOTH
An especially reclusive Outer God who hunts along the
shores of the River of Souls, Nhimbaloth is a shapeless
entity known as the Empty Death. She preys on those
who hunt souls as they travel down the river, but she
devours both hunter and soul indiscriminately; those she
consumes have no afterlife or potential for resurrection.
They are forever gone, and forever nothing.
Nhimbaloth is said to see through will-o’-wisps,
and her trace is left behind in a symmetrical pattern
of seven divots along the shoreline, said to be her
fingerprints. Faceless undead haunt the places where
she has passed, and plant and animal life in the area is
especially hostile to the living. One place where she has
particular influence is within the Mushfens of southern
Varisia, where will-o’-wisp oracles sap the drive and
reason from their victims and leave them wandering in
a vacuous stupor through the blasted swamp.

NYARLATHOTEP
Nyarlathotep is a being of a thousand shapes, each of
which has a name, such as the Haunter of the Dark or the
Black Pharaoh. Because he has walked the world in mortal
form, Nyarlathotep is unique among the Outer Gods for
appearing comprehensible and understandable—but this
is a facade. The Crawling Chaos, as he is also known,
appears humanlike not because he identifies with mortal

90

19092667

4121845

4121845

19092668

19092668


concerns or cares for his mortal followers, but because
a mortal shape makes it easier for him to do his work:
spreading the influence of the Outer Gods.
In his role as a herald, messenger, and agent
provocateur for the Outer Gods, Nyarlathotep is the
Outer God most likely to have direct interactions
with mortals. He answers prayers, teaches evil magic,
and inserts himself into history—all to enable mortal
cruelty, facilitate the release of Great Old Ones, and
turn whole societies toward worship of the Outer
Gods. He was instrumental in the fall of Ancient
Osirion, and some believe he led Taldor to launch the
Armies of Exploration, a glorious folly that proved
the ruin of that empire. There are countless tales of
his interaction with (and often possession of) mortal
cultists and magicians who dare to call upon him,
and they all end in grotesque corruption and death.
Nyarlathotep also lingers among
Azathoth’s court, carrying out schemes
under the guise of the Primal Chaos’s will.

that almost always results in untold destruction. He
is known as the Key and the Gate, and magicians and
cults research him in an effort to master time and space.
Fortunately, his worship is not widespread, but some of
those who have delved deep into his secrets describe him
as an ambivalent figure, rather than a malevolent one,
who guards cosmic secrets and makes them accessible
to those who dare to ask for them. Yog-Sothoth reveals
the true nature of the universe, but this is a thing that
once seen cannot be unseen, and wise mortals turn
aside from Yog-Sothoth’s offer of cosmic knowledge in
favor of a more mundane existence.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

XHAMEN-DOR
Xhamen-Dor, the living cancer,
was born in the sewers beneath
Carcosa, the alien city that is
the home of Hastur. Somehow,
this Great Old One was
transported to Golarion within
a comet, crashing into the bottom
of a lake during the devastation
of
Earthfall.
Physically,
it
manifests as a twisting and vaguely
serpentine-shaped mass of bone,
hair, and fungus.
The Inmost Blot, as Xhamen-Dor is also known,
exists to conquer worlds by infecting the living
with itself. Its victims, the seeded, enact its will
and seek to spread its influence until the entire
world is just an extension of Xhamen-Dor itself.
Then, once only the seeded remain, Xhamen-Dor
uses the last of the planet’s energy to return to Carcosa,
which in turn absorbs the world Xhamen-Dor has
brought to it, allowing Carcosa to slowly grow.

4121845

YOG-SOTHOTH
Yog-Sothoth is, along with Azathoth, one of the
greatest of the Outer Gods. In appearance, he is said to
be a congeries of iridescent spheres—brilliant, foaming
bubbles that constantly expand and collapse in upon
themselves. He has other manifestations, however,
including the Lurker on the Threshold, a mass of
black tentacles that endlessly writhe, reach, and grow,
and a mysterious humanoid figure hidden behind a
shimmering veil.
Yog-Sothoth embodies all of space and time; he
exists in all places and in all moments simultaneously.
Paradoxically, however, he is unable to manifest in
the mortal universe unless summoned, a magical act

HASTUR

91

19092668

4121846

4121846


Philosophies and Spirituality

19092669

19092669

Faith on Golarion isn’t limited to worshipping one god.
Some worshippers draw power from multiple deities, while
others follow the spirits of the world, or reject the divine
entirely, relying on secular philosophies for guidance. The
following pages present examples of the diverse religious
and philosophical practices of the Inner Sea region.

PANTHEONS
A pantheon is a group of related gods worshipped either
individually or together. Most pantheons are associated
with a specific ancestry or geopolitical region, but rarely,
a pantheon consists of deities with overlapping areas of
concern. Followers work to advance the shared interests of
their pantheon, directing prayers to whichever god presides
over their current activity or circumstance. At the GM’s
discretion, champions and clerics can dedicate themselves
to a pantheon. In such cases, the characters still worship
a specific patron deity among those in the pantheon, but
also follow the edicts and anathema of the pantheon as a
whole. A character who worships a pantheon this way can
gain the domains, alternate domains, and spells from the
pantheon instead of those from their patron deity. They
must uphold the ideals of both their patron deity and the
pantheon, though the patron deity’s edicts and anathema
take precedence. For example, a worshipper of Iomedae
could worship the Godclaw, but they wouldn’t take the
tyranny domain, as it would be in conflict with Iomedae’s
edicts. In rare cases, a character can worship a pantheon

4121846

without following a patron deity. Such cases are unique and
subject to GM approval.

Dwarven Pantheon
Areas of Concern ancestry, crafting, dwarves, relationships
Alignment LG (LG, LN, NG, N)
Divine Font heal
Divine Ability Constitution or Wisdom
Divine Skill Diplomacy
Domains creation, family, protection, wealth
Alternate Domains duty, glyph
Cleric Spells 1st: ant haul, 4th: creation, 7th: retrocognition
Edicts develop skills useful to your community (especially
crafting, mining, and trading), honor your ancestors
through traditions and rituals
Anathema dishonor your family, willingly break a contract or
oath, irreparably damage an ancestral relic
Favored Weapon warhammer
The dwarven gods are one large family, with Torag as
its patriarch. He is joined by his brothers Magrim (the
Taskmaster) and Angradd (the Forge Fire), his half-sister
Dranngvit (the Debt Minder), and his wife Folgrit (the
Watchful Mother). His children are Bolka (the Golden Gift),
Grundinnar (the Peacemaker), Kols (the Oath-Keeper), and
Trudd (the Mighty). Torag’s evil former student Droskar
(the Dark Smith), though technically part of the dwarven
pantheon, is rarely invoked by any save duergars.

92

19092669

4121847

4121847


GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

19092670

19092670

4121847

Elven Pantheon

The Godclaw

Areas of Concern elves, magic, nature, tradition
Alignment CG (NG, CG, CN)
Divine Font heal
Divine Ability Dexterity or Intelligence
Divine Skill Survival
Domains creation, magic, moon, nature
Cleric Spells 1st: shillelagh, 2nd: shape wood, 5th: tree stride
Edicts learn and appreciate traditional elven arts, crafts, and
magic, explore the worlds outside and within
Anathema irreparably damage the natural environment (such
as by overhunting or strip mining), have an unhealthy
obsession or attachment
Favored Weapon longbow or shortbow

Areas of Concern discipline, laws, order, strategy
Alignment LN (LG, LN, LE)
Divine Font harm or heal
Divine Ability Strength or Intelligence
Divine Skill Society
Domains perfection, protection, tyranny, zeal
Alternate Domains duty
Cleric Spells 1st: phantom pain, 4th: fire shield, 6th: dominate
Edicts eliminate chaos at its root, be an exemplar of order
(worthy of not one, but five), seek the universal laws that
transcend individual faiths
Anathema rest when there is lawlessness to fight, believe you
know or understand more than the pantheon
Favored Weapon morningstar

The traditional deities of the elven pantheon are Calistria,
Desna, Findeladlara (goddess of twilight and traditional
art and architecture), Ketephys (god of hunting and the
moon), and Yuelral (goddess of gems, craft, and magic).
Elves have also adopted Alseta, a minor goddess of
doors and transitions, as their patron of teleportation
and aiudara (commonly known as elf gates). Most elves
value magic, beauty, freedom, and friendship as part
of a fulfilling life and tend to worship all of the deities
together as exemplars of these values. Alongside fullblooded elves, many half-elves—whether raised by elves
or seeking a closer connection to their elven heritage—
worship the elven pantheon.

The Hellknight Order of the Godclaw reveres a
pantheon of five deities: Iomedae and Torag are seen
as Hellknights (concerned with offensive and defensive
combat, respectively), Irori as the epitome of emotionless
discipline, Abadar as a keeper of laws, and Asmodeus as
a strategist king. Depictions of these deities as part of the
Godclaw differ from traditional images, with the deities
portrayed as stern, armored paragons of law. Though
some members of the Order of the Godclaw dedicate
themselves to individual gods, many take the whole
pantheon as their patron, receiving spells despite their
unorthodox (perhaps even heretical) beliefs.

93

19092670

4121848

4121848


Esoteric Order of
the Palatine Eye
Areas of Concern history, occultism, secret lore
Alignment LN (LG, LN, LE, N)
Divine Ability Intelligence or Wisdom
Divine Skill Occultism
Edicts seek out wisdom of ancient cultures
(particularly Ancient Osirion), provide succor to
scholars, honor the rites of the order
Anathema reveal the order’s secrets to those outside the
organization (or even to insufficiently ranked members),
destroy rare or ancient lore

Joining the Order
The order maintains a convoluted
and rigid hierarchy. New members
may join only with a recommendation
from an existing member and
a thorough social and magical
screening. They have the lowly rank
of acolyte for 3 years regardless
of their social status or wealth, to
honor Aldus’s seclusion. Higher
ranks are available only to those
who demonstrate loyalty, preserve
the order’s secrets, and make regular
contributions of funds or occult lore.
Yet even the aristocratic Elect of
Nine who lead the order still labor at
unraveling Aldus’s many enigmas.

19092671

19092671

Based in Ustalav but active in aristocratic salons and
cloistered academies across Avistan and Garund, the
Esoteric Order of the Palatine Eye is a
mystic order of occultist-nobles who seek
philosophical self-awareness and mastery
of celestial truths. The order was founded in
3988 ar when the gentleman-explorer Aldus Canter
returned from the Osirian desert where he had been
lost for 3 years. Aldus spoke of meeting a cult following a desiccated angel
named Tabris. Tabris revealed the secret history of the multiverse and tasked
Aldus with acting as a messenger of mystic secrets. Upon his return, Aldus
gathered a coterie of his fellow Ustalavic nobles eager to plumb these secrets.
His message was far from clear, however, consisting of garbled and coded
texts in an untidy medley of Osirian mysticism, Pharasmin rites, and Varisian
occult lore. Scouring Aldus’s texts—both those brought from Osirion and
his many annotations and reinterpretations penned thereafter—has been
the order’s primary activity for centuries, even before the increasingly erratic
Aldus disappeared in 4028 ar. The Esoteric Order’s meticulous research has
produced occult secrets and mystical rites known nowhere else on Golarion
and hints at further secret lore for the enlightened. The order’s greatest
accomplishment, however, was averting a doomsday few on Golarion will
ever realize was imminent: in 4718 ar, the order’s greatest heroes prevented
the planet Aucturn from devouring Golarion.
As a secretive organization of the wealthy and powerful, the order is the
subject of innumerable conspiracy theories. Rumors hint at devil worship,
psychological manipulation, and outright fraud. The order rarely deigns to
address these insinuations, which leaves them free to fester.
Members of the order wear eccentric faux-Osirian garb in their private
meeting houses, which they call cathedrals. This clothing consists of gloves,
robes, aprons, ornamental weapons, and more, each with layers of ceremonial
meaning that even the wearer may not yet be permitted to understand.
Cathedral services are often elaborate ceremonies, such as séances, mummy
unwrappings, and similar affairs. Cathedrals are designed to aid research
and social networking, and to that end they often include exclusive libraries
and private social clubs. Outside of cathedral, members wear inconspicuous
symbols of the order; the most common of these is a golden scarab bearing
the Palatine Eye—an open, blazing eye—upon its shell.
The order’s most earnest members wholeheartedly believe the secrets
hinted at within Aldus’s fragmentary lost gospels of Tabris: that each person
contains a mote of celestial energy seeking reunification with the primordial
heavenly realms. Cultivating this divine spark requires diligent research,
convoluted ritual, and gradual ascension through the order’s ranks.

4121848

94

19092671

4121849

4121849

19092672

19092672


God Calling

GODS &
MAGIC

Areas of Concern Each god has their own particular inclinations and interests,
typically informed by the predominant attitudes and beliefs of their clan.
Alignment The alignments of Sarkorian god callers are as varied as their many
gods, though the tendency toward nature-oriented spiritual philosophies tends
to encourage neutral alignments. The advent and closure of the Worldwound
affected the people of Sarkoris profoundly, however, and evil god
callers are now exceedingly rare.
Edicts The gods of Sarkoris have very few shared
edicts, but several are often prominently
shared amongst them: protect your clan and
your people, educate the clan’s children’s in
the traditions and histories of the clan’s god,
and carefully record the name and image of each
new god when they first appear so that they are not
forgotten and can continue to watch over the people.
Anathema There is only one anathema universally enforced by
the gods of Sarkoris: make no deals or bargains with demons,
as the advent of the Worldwound led to the destruction of
many clans and the loss of many gods, some of whom may never be seen again.
The ancient art of god calling was once the predominant religious practice
in Sarkoris, long before the Worldwound erupted and demons drove most
of the native Sarkorians from their homelands. This art, one part magical
theory and one part religion, allows certain Sarkorians to summon unusual
and unique beings from the Great Beyond who protect their clans and guide
their people. These creatures are typically referred to as gods by those who
revere them, and they continue to return and guide their people generation
after generation, so long as someone trained by a previous god caller or
otherwise educated in the practice of communing with a particular god is
alive to form a tether to the Material Plane so that the god can manifest.
These god callers may have unique titles or names among the people of their
clan, and such monikers differ from clan to clan, but most of the clans of
Sarkoris are able to distinguish a god caller by their unique dress or glyph
that ties the caller to their god.
The creatures summoned by god callers often appear as animals, such
as wolves or bears, with one or more prominent features that make their
otherworldliness plain to see. One might manifest as a bear with a feathery
mane, a wolf sprouting eagle’s wings, or some other combination of
features. Many Sarkorians tell stories of the first gods of Sarkoris, like the
Stag Mother of the Forest, and believe that these first gods were the perfect
embodiment of creatures of the natural world. As the clans intermarried,
new gods were born to god callers of these lines, leading to the hybrid forms
common among the few remaining Sarkorian clans. Some of these new gods
even resemble extraplanar creatures like angels or psychopomps, though
they always have some signifier to distinguish them as something different
than these beings.
Regardless of how they came to worship the gods of Sarkoris, those who
claim the title of god caller—much like those who call themselves children
of Sarkoris—are now as diverse in appearance and custom as all the nations
of the Inner Sea region. This diversity not only strengthens the clans and
people of Sarkoris but also the power of the new clan gods who draw their
form and function from their people. All god callers and their followers share
a deep‑rooted respect for the gods who walk among them, imparting their
wisdom and sharing their strength directly with their people. Statistics for
the worship of some representative Sarkorian gods are detailed on page 132.

OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

God calling Revived

4121849

Today, the scattered descendants of
the displaced people of old Sarkoris
have begun to return to their ancestral
lands, and in some instances have
rediscovered the lost traditions of
their people, giving rise to new god
callers and new gods. Since Sarkorians
were exiled to all corners of the
Inner Sea region and beyond, the
gods emerging now are as diverse
and unusual as the many cultures of
Golarion. Even a few non-Sarkorians
who find themselves disenchanted
with the distance maintained by
Golarion’s “true gods” have begun to
adopt the religions of the people of
Sarkoris, preferring to be part of a
community whose gods live and walk
amongst them, fight alongside them,
and provide tangible and visible aid.
Crusaders and warriors who travel
the lands that once contained the
Worldwound looking for a chance
to slay demons and earn glory often
come to venerate the Sarkorian gods
after fighting alongside them in battle
or being saved by a clan’s god.

95

19092672

4121850

4121850


Green Faith
Areas of Concern veneration of the natural world
Alignment N (LN, NG, N, NE, CN)
Divine Ability Wisdom or Constitution
Divine Skill Nature
Edicts guide civilization to grow in harmony with nature, live
sustainably and according to natural cycles, preserve areas of natural
wilderness, protect the balance of nature, protect endangered species
Anathema cause damage to natural settings, kill animals for reasons
other than self-defense or sustenance, remove an element or
indigenous species from a natural area, encourage imbalance in
nature, allow abuse of natural resources

Tenets of the Faith
Though the Green Faith claims
no sacred text or deity, its
scattered followers share the same
guiding principles. Practitioners
understandably prefer to worship
outdoors surrounded by the wild
beauty they revere: temples and
shrines can be any hallowed space
in nature, from majestic waterfalls
and volcanoes to hidden springs,
ancient glades, or a single mossy
rock in a quiet wood. Druidic rites are
sometimes performed within a circle
of standing stones or wooden pillars,
which serve as both celestial markers
and pillars of knowledge. Ancient
members of the Green Faith have been
known to preserve their convoluted
wisdom for future generations by
reverently carving runes into the
stones, leaving behind whispers of
knowledge for those who seek to
understand nature’s mysteries.

19092673

19092673

While the Green Faith is practiced differently from one believer
to another, especially across its various orders, its adherents share
a universal reverence for the natural world and a commitment
to preserving it. While each order’s practitioners may be drawn
to a particular element, season, creature, or natural occurrence, all
followers respect the sanctity and importance of every aspect of nature.
Many cycles have passed since the Green Faith’s fabled founders contended
over which expression of natural power was supreme. Just as the legend
speaks of their ultimate unity, those who now follow the Green Faith and view
nature as sacred understand the interconnectedness of all beings, recognizing
that harmony is possible only through balance, and that the cycles of nature
are both delicate and infinite. Advocates of the Green Faith therefore fall
into a neutral alignment, for they understand that by naming one thing, its
opposite is also created; they walk the path of balance between death and
rebirth, light and shadow, growth and decay.
Druids and rangers are frequently followers of the Green Faith, as their lives
and magic are especially linked to nature whether they tend a simple garden
or roam the vast wilderness. Champions are rare among the Green Faith and
are usually champions of nature deities, but they are no less devoted than
champions of other faiths. Some clans worship as a community, calling on the
power or attributes of specific animals and elements, while others build their
lives around nature’s endless cycles. Priests of the Green Faith often travel
to educate settlements on living sustainably, caring for animals and crops,
anticipating the weather, and finding useful herbs and fungi. Most members
of the Green Faith do not oppose civilization, so long as it is built with
respect for the natural world that surrounds it. In addition to holding nature
sacrosanct, they believe that access to nature’s beauty is essential to the health
of all people, whether isolated nomads or metropolitan urbanites.
Though the Green Faith has no official church, the faith nonetheless
maintains a structure of sorts. Most notably, the majority of the faith’s
adherents belong to one of several orders dedicated to a particular aspect of
nature, such as air, beasts, or plants. The more prominent orders, such as the
Order of the Leaf and Order of the Storm, span all of Golarion, while more
niche orders, like the Order of the Rift, commit themselves to specific areas
like volcanoes. Each order maintains oral records and passes its wisdom down
through generations. These collections of knowledge can take a lifetime of
study to understand, and are thus divided into “circles.” Members of an order
move through these circles as they gain more knowledge and responsibility
within their respective order.
In the Inner Sea region, the Green Faith has the strongest presence in
Andoran, the Mwangi Expanse, Nirmathas, Taldor, and the River Kingdoms,
though a few dedicated holdouts remain in Sarkoris after the demonic
incursion, and members can be found scattered through other realms as well.

4121850

96

19092673

4121851

4121851

19092674

19092674


Laws of Mortality

GODS &
MAGIC

Areas of Concern mortal affairs, peace, self-rule
Alignment LN (LG, LN, LE, NG, N, NE)
Divine Ability Constitution or Intelligence
Divine Skill Medicine
Edicts challenge religious power and the spread of religion, expose and eradicate
hidden worship, provide a peaceful and autonomous society in which the
people are cared for through social infrastructure
Anathema worship or swear an oath by a deity or religion, solicit or receive divine
or religious aid, take a side in conflicts between religions
The Laws of Mortality originated in the Garundi nation of Rahadoum
as a response to the Oath Wars, a series of internecine conflicts that
were tearing the nation’s society apart. The fundamental
principle behind the Laws is a relatively simple assertion
that deific aid—even the best intentioned—ultimately
comes at too high a price. The slaughter of fellow mortals
for the glory of distant, unfathomable beings is not
something that should be permitted within a society.
Instead, mortal beings must shape their own fate, aware of
their own limitations, trusting in their reliance upon one another and
their shared values rather than divine intervention and guidance. This
philosophy is summed up in the primary tenet of the Laws of Mortality:
Let no mortal be beholden to a god.
The Laws of Mortality are the cornerstone of Rahadoum’s government,
and thus religion and worship are banned across the entire nation, enforced
by the merciless Pure Legion. As a side effect of this prohibition, Rahadoum’s
government has a vested interest in supporting its citizens through education
and other means, since there is no church to rely upon to provide crucial
social services. Within Rahadoum, most civilians are raised to observe the
Laws of Mortality, but the code has some adherents beyond the land in which
it arose. Most of these followers have seen for themselves the terrible costs of
interreligious conflict or have learned of the callous treatment of mortal souls
in the Outer Sphere, and as a result they have chosen a position of intentional
neutrality. Some of these followers work to spread the philosophy outside of
Rahadoum, pointing out the gods’ abuses of mortals and the ultimate prices
that must be paid for their assistance. Such proselytizers face a difficult, if not
impossible, task—but one they face with the same determination with which
they face their own mortality.
One of the most obvious results of the Laws of Mortality is that it
prohibits the use of many forms of healing magic, as the most common
restorative magic is granted by divine favor. Thus alchemists, bards, and
other occult spellcasters provide the majority of the Rahadoum’s healing,
alongside entirely non-magical techniques. Many adherents of the Laws
not only refuse to practice divine magic but also refuse to allow such magic
to be cast upon them, preferring a death unsullied by divine intervention
over one indebted to distant, uncaring deities who trade in souls. Druids’
standing with regard to the Laws is sharply divided. Those who don’t
worship a deity are welcome due to their healing powers and their ability
to combat the nation’s desertification, but they are viewed with suspicion in
some places since their magic shares its instinctual faith-based vital essence
with divine magic. Those druids who uphold a deity, however, meet even
more antipathy than more traditional theists, as though their reverence of a
deity were a hypocritical affront to the natural world they claim to uphold.
Likewise, sorcerers whose bloodlines can be traced back to divine sources
are viewed with suspicion and distaste.

OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

The Pure Legion
Rahadoum’s Pure Legion enforces
the Laws of Mortality within
Rahadoum. The organization’s
mission is to remove all signs of
religion from the nation. Pure
Legion enforcers confiscate all holy
books, religious symbols, and other
faith paraphernalia, punishing any
proselytizers with little mercy.
Punishments for worship are
typically harsh, ranging from lengthy
imprisonment to exile from Rahadoum
to death. Although the Pure Legion
carries out rigorous searches of all
travelers through notable ports in
Rahadoum, its enforcement is not
perfect. Rahadoum is still host to
small pockets of worshippers, each
keeping their faiths and beliefs a
secret lest they meet with retribution
from the law.

4121851

97

19092674

4121852

4121852


Prophecies of
Kalistrade
Areas of Concern trade, wealth, self-denial, stability
Alignment LN (LN, LE, NE)
Divine Ability Intelligence or Charisma
Divine Skill Diplomacy
Edicts accumulate personal wealth, seek enlightenment
through purity of self, foster and aid mercantile pursuits,
welcome newcomers regardless of gender or ancestry
Anathema spend money frivolously; offer money to
those who don’t deserve wealth; overindulge in physical
pleasures, food, or drink; give charity to others

Joining the Prophets
Commitment to the Prophecies is the
sole requirement for a Kalistocrat,
and anyone—regardless of ancestry,
heritage, nationality, gender, or
social status—is welcomed into
discipleship. Worship of a deity is
neither forbidden nor encouraged;
Kalistocrats who feel drawn to a
divinity typically venerate Abadar
or, less often, Irori. New converts
are ushered into a highly organized
network that inculcates business
acumen and provides financial
support for new enterprises.
Success is seen as a reflection
of personal faithfulness, but it is
also the outcome of a supportive
and dedicated organization with a
single‑minded mission.

19092675

19092675

The secular prophecies of Kalistrade are famously
centered on a single principle: amassing personal
wealth both in search of and as evidence of personal
enlightenment. The prophets of Kalistrade, often referred
to as Kalistocrats, believe that achieving purity of body, mind,
and spirit will lead to financial success, and thus they avoid certain foods
and eschew contact with most persons and objects as impure. To avoid
contamination and contact with nonbelievers they wear long, white gloves,
and they wear distinctive, all-white clothing to represent their purity—often
incorporating their symbol, a circle inside a triangle that is itself inscribed
in a larger circle.
The human prophet Kalistrade lived in Druma in the third century ar.
Following an 8-year journey of enlightenment, he began preaching an
economic mysticism that drew on his own dream visions, Druman traditions
of industriousness, and Kellid folklore about an earlier religion—the whiteclad Speakers of the Pale. Following his disappearance in 252 ar, his
disciples reworked his Ontologies of Self, adding more of his writings and
their own commentaries. The resulting momentous tome is the Prophecies
of Kalistrade. This sizable text consists of hundreds of pages that compile
Kalistrade’s core principles and teachings. Among its fables, parables, occult
mysticism, and other ramblings are sound economic lessons and many
particulars about personal purity. The size of the tome makes it difficult
to keep as a reference manual. Instead, most copies of the Prophecies are
designed for home use, with many of them printed as large tomes bound in
precious metals and embedded with jewels.
Purity of mind, body, and spirit is Kalistrade’s fundamental requirement
for the attainment of personal affluence. A Kalistocrat achieves purity of
mind primarily through meditation, a practice to be called on throughout
the day whenever focus deviates from the pursuit of wealth. Mental purity
also demands a Kalistocrat avoid any temptations to bestow charity or
to be wasteful. Bodily purity, based in principles of ascetic self-denial, is
much more complicated. First, the Kalistocrat recognizes three categories
of food: pure, clean, and unclean, depending on each ingredient’s origin,
processing, and nutritional profile. To achieve purity, a practitioner must
avoid eating any unclean foods, instead taking simple and light meals
(with very occasional exceptions for ostentatious feasting). Second, the
Kalistocrat strives to remain free of any physical contact, particularly with
nonbelievers. Voluntary touching is assiduously avoided, and involuntary
touching is minimized through the use of gloves and enveloping clothing.
While the Prophecies enjoin celibacy, many Kalistocrats make some personal
exceptions. Most permissible are sexual relations with a likely convert or a
wealthy patron—or, better, someone who is both.

4121852

98

19092675

4121853

4121853

19092676

19092676


Sangpotshi

GODS &
MAGIC

Areas of Concern fate, karma, and reincarnation
Alignment N (LG, LN, LE, NG, N)
Divine Ability Intelligence or Wisdom
Divine Skill Religion
Edicts live selflessly; heed the wisdom of the learned, the wise, and
those in stations of authority
Anathema needlessly break significant traditions, actively interfere
with the perfection efforts of another soul or allow others to do so
The philosophy of Sangpotshi, also known as the River
of Life, centers around concepts of fate, karma, and cyclic
reincarnation. Adherents believe each soul is judged upon its
actions in life, and these actions determine its station when
it returns to the living world. This cycle repeats until the soul
reaches its perfected form through the accrual of experience and
wisdom, whereupon it passes on to Pharasma’s court and the afterlife
to come.
While the philosophy itself is separate from the faiths of the gods and
the facets of multiversal morality, its teachings are most compatible with
the ethics of law and good. In the hope of reaching enlightenment, devotees
seek to live blameless, selfless lives respectful of tradition, legitimate
authority, and the wisdom of those born into certain positions. Many strive
to discover and influence the forces that will affect their next life, whether
via genealogy, introspection, or the preparation of records for their next
life. Genealogists are called upon to provide insight into past lives’ failings,
so adherents can correct those faults and progress toward enlightenment.
Intellectual leaders, meanwhile, are often called upon to aid in matters of
the current life, helping adherents live well within the station of their birth,
follow the laws and traditions of their societies, and best use the resources
available to them.
Followers of Sangpotshi’s teachings place great influence on meditation
and introspection, as they hope to better understand their own existence and
reconcile their being with their past and present actions so they can strive
toward the future state they hope to achieve. Such reflection allows followers
to understand their own flaws and past mistakes. Acceptance of the past is a
pivotal part of the philosophy, as a mortal being can very easily stagnate and
lock themselves into an endless cycle of new attempts at improvement that
never truly solve the challenges that came before.
Sangpotshi encourages individuals who are unable to fully understand
their own mistakes to find others who share similar flaws or difficulties,
under the premise that helping others overcome a challenge can also help
the individual giving aid and teach them how to overcome their own
struggles. Followers are quick to note that attempting to solve the entirety
of a neighbor’s issues is unhelpful, though, as everyone’s path along the
River of Life is different. The river teaches tolerance and patience with one
another, and that what may seem like an obvious solution or lesson for one
should be left for another individual to discover on their own, unless they
ask for help.
Sangpotshi places great importance on one’s fate, but the philosophy is by
no means a passive way of life. Most devotees strive to better themselves,
certain that their efforts will be rewarded in a future incarnation, while
others actively seek to break from their present circumstances without
forsaking the teachings of the philosophy. The latter path is difficult, and not
all who attempt it succeed, but those who do find themselves one step closer
to ultimate recompense.

OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

Sangpotshi and The Gods
Sangpotshi is compatible with
the faiths of many deities, and it
is common for devotees to also
hold faith in divine entities. The
philosophy often influences their
methods of worship, with Abadarans
keeping careful records of their
wealth or even investing money for
a future incarnation, and Pharasmins
beseeching the psychopomp
bureaucracy to look favorably upon
their deeds in life and shepherd
their future selves to enlightenment.
Some worshippers of malicious
deities follow a twisted version of
Sangpotshi, seeking to extend their
existences through undeath and
using the time gained to perfect
their stations in this incarnation.
Most adherents of the traditional
teachings, by contrast, consider
undead to be prisons for souls that
lock them away from the cycle of
fate and reincarnation, and destroy
undead wherever they can be found.

4121853

99

19092676

4121854

4121854


Shoanti Animism
Most Shoanti belong to one of seven quahs, or clans, each
with specific lands, notable strengths, and unique spiritual
perspectives. Traditionally, each Shoanti undergoes a rite of
passage into adulthood, during which time their particular totem
manifests, and a Shoanti’s first tattoo is an homage to that totem.
The quahs and their most common totems are listed below:
Lyrune-Quah (Moon Clan) bat, cave bear, moon, mountain lion,
owl, stars
Shadde-Quah (Axe Clan) cliffs, eagle, sea, shark, squid, water
elemental
Shriikirri-Quah (Hawk Clan) cloud, falcon, hawk, hippogriff,
horse, wind
Shundar-Quah (Spire Clan) avalanche, earth elemental,
mountain spire or peak, roc, spirestalker
Sklar-Quah (Sun Clan) aurochs, cindersnake, emberstorm, fire
elemental, flames, the sun
Skoan-Quah (Skull Clan) ancestors, earth elemental, giant
scarab beetle, vulture, will-o’-wisp, wolf
Tamiir-Quah (Wind Clan) air elemental, cloud, griffon, roc,
storm, wind

Shoanti Rituals
Certain rites and rituals are triggered
by events throughout the year,
such as solstices and eclipses, along
with disease, famine, and warfare.
Personal situations, such as giving
birth or coming of age, also invoke
specific rituals. Different quahs
perform these rituals in different
ways; variation is acceptable and
widespread, reflecting the importance
of the individual and the clan in
manifesting their own individual
practice. These traditions are under
constant revision and adaptation,
as the individual or the situation
requires. Perhaps most important
of all Shoanti rituals are the rites
to pass into adulthood. Part of this
ceremony involves the Shoanti
forming a connection with a specific
totem. The totem is a manifestation
of the earth’s vital essence, the
power of life, focused in a particular
natural form. Each quah has its own
characteristic totems, as listed above.

19092677

19092677

According to their own tradition, Shoanti have lived in the
northwestern lands of Avistan since long before colonizers fractured
the Varisians’ homeland. Yet the Shoanti people still maintain their
independence and traditional way of life in areas across Varisia, particularly
on the Storval Plateau.
Shoanti animism is rooted in a deep connection to the land. Shoanti see the
earth not merely as a metaphorical parent, but as a conscious entity whose
constant support is necessary for the survival of all life upon it—animal and
vegetable alike. Their traditions emphasize connection and the reciprocal
way in which the land provides for those who take care of it. The life force
of the land serves as the source of Shoanti power and insight, rather than the
otherworldly spiritual essence of the Great Beyond common to clerics. This
life force is the birth of instinct and faith, and thus it sends omens to indicate
future events, warning those with the wisdom to read the signs. Thus most
Shoanti hold a profound reverence for natural phenomena as a manifestation
of the will of the earth.
Shoanti animism has no required creeds or written doctrine, nor regular
worship services. Holy places simply exist, as acknowledged by an individual,
family, or quah (a clan). Shamans may designate places of importance, but
these are not exclusive. Indeed, little is exclusive or limiting about traditional
Shoanti beliefs. Faith is felt by each practitioner; it manifests as an overall
attitude toward the land and all that depends on it for life, but it has no hard
rules or set restrictions.
Many Shoanti find themselves drawn to particular features of the world
around them, forming a bond with a specific river, a particular tree, or a type
of creature, but even such connections are fleeting. Most Shoanti agree that
such calls from the earth last only as long as a person requires them to survive
the rigors of the world or to gain the understanding required to overcome a
particular obstacle. Such connections are considered less significant than an
individual’s connection to a totem, but no less powerful.
Shoanti shamans are usually druids who draw their power from a
particularly strong connection to their totem and the earth. Because adherents
are welcome to add beliefs, rituals, sites, and objects of worship, shamans are
sometimes also clerics of a particular deity, such as Desna or Gozreh.

4121854

100

19092677

4121855

4121855

19092678

19092678


Atheists and
Free Agents

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW

Alignment any
Edicts none
Anathema none

GODS OF THE
INNER SEA

In a world where the gods demonstrably exist,
few people uphold a strictly atheistic or agnostic
worldview; that is, a belief that there are no gods, or
that the existence of gods is unknowable. However,
a good number of people choose not to worship any
deities whatsoever. Many do so because of the value
they place on freedom—not being beholden to a deity
means no limitations, no censure, no anathema, and
no strictures. While this decision might sound amoral
to some, for atheists, it can be motivated by a desire
for autonomy and the right to choose one’s own fate.
Some atheists feel no particular interest toward any
of the gods or the divine in general. As a result, they
find the thought of worship pointless and unappealing,
a waste of time for both the god and the atheist. While
these atheists are most likely to be tolerant of the gods and
religion in general, they often chafe at efforts to convert them, seeing
such overtures as societal pressure to pretend there is faith where truthfully
there is none.
Some atheists are driven by thoughts and fears of the afterlife, and by
dismay or outrage at the idea of spending eternity serving at the behest of an
eternal master. To such people, a quiet eternity in the Boneyard’s graves is akin
to a reprieve or a comforting certainty, especially compared to the helpless
terror of being judged by a higher power and sent onward to an unknown
destination, with little to no say in the matter.
Some atheists feel the gods aren’t inherently worthy of worship. While these
skeptics acknowledge that the gods are undeniably powerful beings, they see
little difference between these deities and other powerful entities on Golarion
and question what the gods have done to merit the worship of mortals. To them,
worship of a deity is akin to revering the power of the Eye of Abendego, or like
a kobold’s veneration of a nearby dragon. Praise and offerings are demanded
for protection, yet the gods are sparing and unreliable with their responses. At
best, such worship is demeaning, and at worst it rivals the practice of slavery
or, in a slightly more charitable view, indentured servitude.
Finally, some refuse to follow the gods out of anger. Those who believe they
have been betrayed by faith in a particular god or wronged by a deity’s followers
might refuse to revere any deity who would willfully choose to inflict such pain.
The paths these free agents follow vary as much as their reasons for rejecting
the divine. Bards turn to the aggregate eclectic knowledge of the beyond.
Alchemists and wizards alike seek to understand the universal underpinnings
of reality through magic, science, and reason. Any number of barbarians,
fighters, rogues, and even sorcerers operate with no need for spiritual guidance
or reinforcement. Many monks look inward for guidance, rather than outward,
and druids and rangers may uphold the natural order but not the divine.
Some free agents refuse any association with the religious altogether. Others
adopt a live-and-let-live policy and are happy to let others worship and work
divine feats. Without any assurances of (or desire for) divine intervention, the
vast majority of the irreligious instead place their faith in other mortals and
endeavor to make the material world a better place for all.

DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

Free Agents on Golarion
Aside from those who uphold the
Laws of Mortality, free agents and
atheists are common in certain places
across Golarion. Both the River
Kingdom of Touvette and the Tian
nation of Bachuan hold widespread
bans on religion (though both are
harsh authoritarian regimes). Many
Prophets of Kalistrade hold no ties to
deities, instead grasping their fate in
their own hands. Worshippers of the
Green Faith sometimes pay reverence
to nature gods, but as often as not
hold no divine allegiance beyond their
awe and reverence of the natural
world. The Graycloaks of Absalom
serve the city, acting as impartial
arbiters of the law in the city’s most
religious district, the Ascendant
Court. But ultimately, these are the
exceptions—most free agents on
Golarion are loners.

4121855

101

19092678

4121856

4121856


Character Options

19092679

19092679

A character’s faith or philosophy can shape them in
powerful ways both fundamental and peripheral, from
the cleric who receives spells by the grace of their deity
to a champion who fights tyranny wielding a weapon
imbued with divine power to a raging barbarian who
cares only that their companions’ divine healing keeps
them in the fight. In a world rife with divine magic,
only a few rare individuals live without considering
how faith affects their lives—even if that consideration
means working in opposition to the divine. The gifts and
curses of the gods filter down through all aspects of life,
from the truly world-shaking powers of the mightiest
clerics to the minor miracles performed by righteous
crusaders and wicked priests to the everyday minutiae of
a common acolyte.
While any character can express their faith through
their actions, the options presented in this chapter
provide ways for a character to incorporate their
convictions into their abilities as well. New domains
and domain spells expand a cleric’s options beyond
those listed in the Pathfinder Core Rulebook. New
spells grant specialized abilities to clerics and other
spellcasters, while new feats, weapons, and gear provide
ways for characters of any class and philosophy to
embrace and express their ideology.
Many of the new rules presented in this section are
closely related to a single deity or domain, but in some
cases, they’re simply more common among a given faith,

4121856

and practitioners of any faith can make use of them if
they can gain access. Priests of Brigh might develop the
formula for a revolutionary magic item available to the
faithful, but that doesn’t mean they won’t ever trade
it in exchange for information about another creator’s
inventions. Similarly, priests of Nalinivati certainly
aren’t the only warriors who wield urumis, but they are
in part responsible for the popularity of the weapon
across the Inner Sea region, and the polytool is only
one of numerous innovations emerging from Numeria.
In addition to seeking access to options simply more
common among other faiths, if you’d like to incorporate
an option limited to a faith other than the one your
character holds, work with your GM to make sure your
use of that option works with the campaign and doesn’t
diminish the choices of other characters who might
worship the original deity who grants that option. If so,
you and the GM might work together to alter certain
aspects of a feat, spell, item, or other option to ensure
it fits your faith and makes sense within the larger story
you want to tell.

FEATS
Feats can be used to customize a character in several
specific ways, whether by expanding the options available
to a character whose class is already tied to a deity, or by
granting ways for a character with an unrelated class to
incorporate a philosophy into their suite of abilities. Some of

102

19092679

4121857

4121857


GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

19092680

19092680

4121857

the feats presented here enhance a follower’s powers, while
other abilities arise among those working to foil or deceive
the faithful. This section includes general feats, skill feats,
and a small number of more specialized class feats.

access to alternate domains and their associated spells.
GMs may instead prefer to take inspiration from the
rules in the Splinter Faith feat to present new approaches
to existing faiths or altogether new faiths.

SPELLS

ITEMS AND WEAPONS

Divine spellcasters can call a deity’s might to their
fingertips, acting as a worldly conduit for divine wrath
or redemption—but not just anyone can call the power
of the gods. Some of the spells in this section are new
additions to the divine spell list, and thus they can be
cast by any clerics, sorcerers whose bloodlines grant
divine spells, or other characters with access to divine
spells. Others are more commonly used by bards, druids,
sorcerers, wizards, and other characters with access to
spellcasting, but can be granted to worshippers of a
specific deity as a blessing to the faithful.

The final section of this chapter provides rules for a
number of new items, both magical and non-magical,
suitable for characters who operate closely within a faith
or philosophy—or those who oppose them! The deities
in this book are revered across all of Golarion, with
some having origins or centers of worship far removed
from the Inner Sea region. As such, many of these deities
favor weapons not commonly found around the Inner
Sea. These new weapons are detailed on pages 120–123.
In addition to the new weapons, this section presents a
variety of exciting items to give all characters the means
to express their faith and make their mark on the world,
from simple trinkets to powerful items granted to the
most favored of a god’s servants.

DOMAINS AND DOMAIN SPELLS
This section provides a number of new domains, as well
as basic and advanced domain spells for each of these
new domains. Several of the gods presented in this book
rely upon the new domains listed here, but several of
the entries for the more common deities on Golarion list
some of the domains in this section as alternate domains,
representing lesser-known or niche aspects of the deity.
Followers of these deities can take the Expanded Domain
Initiate or Splinter Faith feats presented on page 8 to gain

APPENDIX
The tables at the end of this book list dozens of other
deities whose faiths are prominent in the Age of Lost
Omens. The chart provides the basic details required for
a worshipper, such as permitted alignments, edicts, and
anathema. GMs and players are encouraged to use the
tables as inspiration for characters and new deities.

103

19092680

4121858

4121858


Feats
While champions and clerics have clear ties to their
chosen deities and gain definitive benefits from them, they
don’t hold a monopoly on such abilities. The following
feats represent ways all characters might benefit from
adherence to a deity or a particular philosophy—as well
as feats for characters who oppose the faithful.

BATTLE PRAYER [one-action]
DIVINE

GENERAL

FEAT 7

SKILL

Prerequisites master in Religion, you follow a deity
Calling out to your deity, you recite scripture to harm a foe.
When you select this feat, choose chaos, evil, good, or law. Your
choice must match one of your deity’s alignment components.
This action has the trait corresponding to the chosen alignment.

BLESS TONIC
GENERAL

FEAT 7

POSITIVE

SKILL

Prerequisites master in Crafting, deity who grants heal
divine font
You channel positive energy into restoratives that ward
against harm. When you Craft an alchemical item that restores
Hit Points (rather than create it with advanced alchemy, Quick
Alchemy, or another means), it becomes a blessed alchemical
item and gains the positive trait. For example, an elixir of life
would become a blessed elixir of life. When a creature regains
Hit Points using a blessed alchemical item, the overflowing
energy grants them negative resistance 5 for 1 round, or
negative resistance 10 if you are legendary in Crafting.

19092681

19092681

Attempt a Religion check against the Will DC of a foe
within 30 feet. The foe is then temporarily immune to Battle
Prayers from your deity for 1 day.
Critical Success You deal 2d6 damage of the chosen alignment
type, or 6d6 damage if you have legendary proficiency
in Religion.
Success You deal 1d6 damage of the chosen alignment type, or
3d6 damage if you have legendary proficiency in Religion.
Failure There is no effect.
Critical Failure The backlash of your foe’s will against your
prayer prevents you from using Battle Prayer again for
10 minutes.

BLESS TOXIN
GENERAL

4121858

FEAT 7

NEGATIVE

SKILL

Prerequisites master in Crafting, deity who grants harm
divine font
You pour negative energy into toxins you create to further
debilitate your targets. When you Craft an alchemical
poison (rather than create it with advanced alchemy,
Quick Alchemy, or another means), it becomes
a blessed alchemical poison and gains the
negative trait. When a creature is afflicted
with a blessed alchemical poison, for 1
round, any Hit Points it would regain from a positive effect are
reduced by 5, or by 10 if you are legendary in Crafting.

BLESSED BLOOD

FEAT 1

SORCERER

SACRED DEFENSE

Prerequisites bloodline that grants divine spells, you follow
a deity
Your deity’s blessings manifest in your blood-borne power.
Add up to three of your deity’s spells (spells your deity grants
to clerics) to your spell list. They are not automatically added
to your repertoire, but you can select them just as you would
spells normally on the divine spell list.

CHARLATAN
GENERAL

FEAT 1
SKILL

Prerequisites trained in Deception
You’ve learned to mimic the abilities of

104

19092681

4121859

4121859

19092682

19092682


spellcasters by studying their flourishes and words. When
you activate a magic item to generate a spell effect, attempt
a Deception check. If you succeed against an onlooker’s
Perception DC, to that onlooker, you appear to Cast that Spell
instead. Onlookers who successfully Recognize the Spell realize
you used a magic item, though those who later successfully
Identify the Magic still can’t determine that the source of the
effect was a magic item.

ENVIRONMENTAL GRACE
GENERAL

FEAT 7

SKILL

Prerequisites master in Survival; deity who grants the cold,
fire, nature, or travel domain
You rapidly adapt to environments through a combination
of skill, meditation, and divine grace. After spending an
hour in an environment of severe cold or colder, you are
protected from the effects of severe cold until you leave that
environment. After spending an hour in an environment of
severe heat or hotter, you are protected from the effects of
severe heat until you leave that environment.

EVANGELIZE [one-action]
AUDITORY

GENERAL

FEAT 7
LINGUISTIC

MENTAL

SKILL

Prerequisites master in Diplomacy, you follow a deity
or philosophy
You point out a detail that incontrovertibly supports your
faith, causing a listener’s mind to whirl. Attempt a Diplomacy
check and compare the result to the Will DC of a single
target that can hear you and understands your language;
that target is then temporarily immune to Evangelize with
respect to your deity or philosophy for 1 day. A creature
that already agrees with you is unaffected, and at the GM’s
discretion, a target that genuinely changes its perspective
to support your faith as a result of the argument is also
otherwise unaffected.
Critical Success The target is stupefied 2 for 1 round.
Success The target is stupefied 1 for 1 round.
Failure The target is unaffected.

MORTAL HEALING
GENERAL

FEAT 2

SKILL

Prerequisites Godless Healing (Pathfinder Lost Omens World
Guide 56), you follow the Laws of Mortality
You grant greater healing when the gods don’t interfere.
When you roll a success to Treat Wounds for a creature that
hasn’t regained Hit Points from divine magic in the past 24
hours, you get a critical success on your check instead and
restore the corresponding amount of Hit Points.

NUMB TO DEATH

FEAT 7

GENERAL

Prerequisites Diehard, you have died at least once
Frequency once per day
Your past has left you numb to death’s call. The first time
each day that you regain Hit Points while you are dying,
you regain additional Hit Points equal to your level, and you
neither gain the wounded condition nor increase the value
of this condition.

SACRED DEFENSE [one-action]
DIVINE

GENERAL

FEAT 7

SKILL

GODS &
MAGIC

Prerequisites master in Religion, you follow a deity
Frequency once per hour
You call upon your deity to grant you their protective
blessing. Attempt a DC 30 Religion check. If you have
legendary proficiency in Religion, you can instead attempt a
DC 40 Religion check to increase the temporary Hit Points
you gain on a successful check to 15 (25 on a critical success).
Critical Success You gain 10 temporary Hit Points. You lose
any remaining temporary Hit Points after 1 minute.
Success You gain 5 temporary Hit Points. You lose any
remaining temporary Hit Points after 1 minute.
Critical Failure Your deity withholds their blessing. You cannot
attempt to call to your deity again for 1 day.

PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY

SACRED KI

FEAT 4

CHARACTER
OPTIONS

Prerequisites Ki Strike, you follow a deity
The power of your faith suffuses your ki. When you select
this feat, choose chaos, evil, good, or law. Your choice must
match one of your deity’s alignment components.
When you cast the ki strike focus spell and damage a
creature whose alignment is opposite your chosen alignment,
you can choose for the ki strike damage to be of the chosen
type. Additionally, you can substitute the damage from ki
blast (or other ki spells that deal force damage, at the GM’s
discretion) with damage of your chosen alignment.

APPENDIX

OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES

MONK

INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121859

SANCTIFY WATER [one-action]
GENERAL

FEAT 7

SKILL

Prerequisites master in Religion, good or evil deity
You imbue water with your deity’s blessing. Choose a container
of water on your person that is of light Bulk. For 1 round, if you
or an ally throw this container at a foe, it has the damaging
effects of holy water (if you follow a good deity) or unholy
water (if you follow an evil deity). The water’s transient power
doesn’t make it gain any value, allow it to be used to supply
the cost for a spell or ritual, and so on. If you have legendary
proficiency in Religion, you can sanctify three containers held
by you or allies within your reach instead of one.

SYNCRETISM

FEAT 1

CLERIC

Prerequisites you follow a deity
You have come to see the overlap between two deities’
teachings. Choose a second deity. You must meet their
alignment requirements, and you are subject to their edicts and
anathema. If you are a cloistered cleric, select one of that deity’s
domains, gaining the benefits of the Expanded Domain Initiate
feat (page 8) with that domain. If you are a warpriest, you gain
the favored weapon of that deity as a second favored weapon,
and it gains the benefits of feats and abilities you have that
affect your deity’s favored weapon, such as Deadly Simplicity. If
you have a different doctrine than cloistered cleric or warpriest,
either apply whichever of the above options is most appropriate
for your doctrine, or, at the GM’s discretion, add a benefit from
the second deity more closely tied to your doctrine.

105

19092682

4121860

4121860


Spells
The following spells are often associated with the deities
of the Inner Sea region.

ACID STORM
ACID

SPELL 5

EVOCATION

Traditions arcane, primal
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Area 20-foot-radius burst
Duration 1 minute
You evoke a storm of acid rain that pelts the area for the
spell’s duration. A creature that begins its turn in the area
takes 3d8 acid damage (basic Reflex save).
Heightened (+2) The damage increases by 1d8.

ACID

SPELL 1

EVOCATION

Traditions arcane, primal
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 5-foot emanation
Saving Throw basic Reflex
You create a shell of acid around yourself that immediately
bursts outward, dealing 2d6 acid damage to each creature
in the area.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6.

AGITATE

SPELL 1
ENCHANTMENT

MENTAL

NONLETHAL

Traditions arcane, occult
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration varies
You send the target’s mind and body into overdrive,
forcing it to become restless and hyperactive.
During the duration, the target must Stride
at least once each turn or take 2d8 mental
damage that turn. The duration of this
effect depends on the target’s Will save.
Critical Success The spell has no effect.
Success The duration is 1 round.
Failure The duration is 2 rounds.
Critical Failure The duration is 4 rounds.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d8.

19092683

19092683

ACIDIC BURST

ANIMUS MINE
ABJURATION

ACIDIC BURST

4121860

SPELL 2

MENTAL

Traditions occult
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 hour
You implant a mental mine within your
psyche that detonates against anyone attempting
to manipulate your thoughts. You can use a single
action, which has the concentrate trait, to suppress
the effects of the mine for 1 round to allow someone
to safely use a mental effect on you. You can Dismiss
the spell.
The first creature that uses a mental
effect against you triggers the animus
mine, causing the spell to end. The animus
mine deals 4d8 mental damage to
the triggering creature, which must
attempt a Will save.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Failure The creature takes full damage and
is stunned 1.
Critical Failure The creature takes double
damage and is stunned 1. You are unaffected by the
triggering mental effect.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d8.

106

19092683

4121861

4121861

19092684

19092684


ANTICIPATE PERIL

SPELL 1

DIVINATION

CURSE

Traditions arcane, occult
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration 10 minutes
You grant the target brief foresight. The target gains a +1 status
bonus to its next initiative roll, after which the spell ends.
Heightened (+2) The status bonus increases by 1, to a
maximum of +4 at 7th level.

BEFUDDLE
EMOTION

SPELL 1

ENCHANTMENT

MENTAL

Traditions arcane
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration 1 round
You sow seeds of confusion in your target’s mind, causing
their actions and thoughts to become clumsy.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is clumsy 1 and stupefied 1.
Failure The target is clumsy 2 and stupefied 2.
Critical Failure The target is clumsy 3, stupefied 3, and confused.

BRAND THE IMPENITENT
ABJURATION

SPELL 2

CURSE

Traditions divine
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Fortitude; Duration varies
You brand the target with an ethereal copy of your deity’s
religious symbol. This brand can’t be hidden, but it is visible
only to followers of your faith, who see it as clearly as a lit
torch. Followers of your faith ignore the target’s concealed
condition, if any, and the target gains a –1 status penalty to
AC against attacks by followers of your faith. If the target is a
follower of your deity in good standing, the spell fails.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The spell lasts for 1 round.
Failure The spell lasts for 1 minute.
Critical Failure The spell has an unlimited duration.

CHILLING SPRAY
COLD

CUP OF DUST

SPELL 1

EVOCATION

Traditions arcane, primal
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 15-foot cone
Saving Throw Will
A cone of icy shards bursts from your spread hands and coats
the target in a layer of frost. You deal 2d4 cold damage to
creatures in the area; they must each attempt a Reflex save.
Critical Success The creature takes no damage.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Failure The creature takes full damage and takes a –5-foot
status penalty to its Speeds for 2 rounds.
Critical Failure The creature takes double damage and takes a
–10-foot status penalty to its Speeds for 2 rounds.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d4.

SPELL 3

NECROMANCY

Traditions arcane, occult, primal
Cast [three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 living creature
Saving Throw Fortitude; Duration 1 day
You curse the target with a thirst no drink can quench. You can
Dismiss the spell. The target must attempt a Fortitude save.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected and is temporarily
immune for 1 hour.
Success The creature is fatigued for 1 round.
Failure The creature is immediately afflicted by thirst as
if it hadn’t had a drink in days. It becomes fatigued and
takes 1d4 damage each hour that can’t be healed until it
quenches its thirst. No amount of drinking can quench the
creature’s thirst during the spell’s duration.
Critical Failure As failure but the creature takes 2d4 damage
each hour, twice as much as usual for thirst.
Heightened (+3) The thirst becomes more unbearable, increasing
the damage each hour by 1d4, or by 2d4 on a critical failure.

ENDURE
ENCHANTMENT

SPELL 1

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

MENTAL

Traditions arcane, occult
Cast [one-action] somatic
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Duration 1 round
You invigorate the touched creature’s mind and urge it to press
on. You grant the touched creature 5 temporary Hit Points.
Heightened (+1) Increase the temporary Hit Points by 5.

EXPEDITIOUS EXCAVATION
EARTH

4121861

SPELL 2

TRANSMUTATION

Traditions arcane, primal
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Area cube of dirt 5 feet across or smaller
You remove loose dirt, dust, gravel, sand, and the like (though
not solid stone) up to the size of a 5-foot cube. Any Medium
or smaller creature standing atop the earth when the spell is
cast must attempt a Reflex save or Acrobatics check.
Success The creature is unaffected and can choose to either
descend the pit without damage or move to the nearest
available space of its choice.
Failure The creature falls prone in the nearest available space
of its choice, or falls into the pit if it prefers.
Critical Failure The creature falls into the pit excavated by
the spell and lands prone, taking falling damage as normal.
Heightened (+2) The spell can excavate an additional 5-foot
cube of earth. If you excavate all four 5-foot cubes beneath
a Large creature, it must attempt a Reflex save or Acrobatics
check, as above.

FEAST OF ASHES
CURSE

SPELL 2

NECROMANCY

Traditions arcane, occult, primal
Cast [three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 living creature
Saving Throw Fortitude; Duration 1 week

107

19092684

4121862

4121862


You curse the target with a hunger no food can sate. You can
Dismiss the spell. The target must attempt a Fortitude save.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected and is temporarily
immune for 1 hour.
Success The creature is fatigued for 1 round.
Failure The creature is immediately afflicted by hunger as if
it hadn’t eaten food in days. It becomes fatigued and takes
1d4 damage each day that can’t be healed until it sates its
hunger. No amount of eating can sate the creature’s hunger
during the spell’s duration. After the spell’s duration, the
creature takes damage from starvation as described on
page 500 of the Core Rulebook.
Critical Failure As failure but the creature takes 2d4 damage
each day, twice as much as usual for hunger.
Heightened (+1) The hunger becomes more unbearable,
increasing the damage each day by 1d4, or by 2d4 on a
critical failure.

FUNGAL HYPHAE
FUNGUS

Traditions primal
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
Thin hyphae grow from your feet and plunge into the earth,
creating a symbiotic fungal network that attaches to plants
within 30 feet and connects you to their root systems.
You gain an imprecise tremorsense allowing you to sense
anything directly touching plants within that distance. If you
move, the hyphae snap and the spell ends.
Heightened (4th) You can control plants in the area to a small
degree, allowing you to make Strikes with tree branches,
exposed roots, or similarly solid plants. To do so, you use a
Strike action, but you can Strike any creature you can detect
with your tremorsense. These are melee spell attacks that
deal 2d8 bludgeoning damage plus your spellcasting ability
modifier. Unusual plants, such as thorny vines, might deal
a different type of damage at the GM’s discretion. You can’t
make any other attacks through these plants, or take any
other actions through them, other than these Strikes.
Heightened (6th) As 4th level, but you can use other simple
manipulate actions through the plants, including having a branch
pick an object up or open a door, though more complex actions,
such as picking a lock or disabling a trap, remain impossible.

19092685

19092685

SPELL 2

NECROMANCY

GRAVITY WELL

SPELL 3

EVOCATION

Traditions arcane, occult
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Area 30-foot-radius burst
Saving Throw Reflex
You create a sphere of altered gravity. All creatures and
unsecured objects in the area move towards the center,
depending on their Reflex saving throws. This follows the
rules for forced movement (Pathfinder Core Rulebook 475).
If there’s not enough space near the center of the sphere,
creatures and objects nearer to the center move first, and
others move as far as they can without being blocked, up to
the amount set by their saving throw outcomes.

Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature moves 5 feet toward the center.
Failure The creature moves 15 feet toward the center.
Critical Failure The creature moves 30 feet toward the center.

ILL OMEN
CURSE

SPELL 1

DIVINATION

MISFORTUNE

Traditions occult
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration 1 round
The target is struck with misfortune, which throws them off
balance. The target must attempt a Will save.
Success The target is unaffected.
Failure The first time during the duration that target rolls an
attack roll or skill check, it must roll twice and take the
worse result.
Critical Failure Every time during the duration that the target
rolls an attack roll or skill check, it must roll twice and take
the worse result.

IRON GUT

SPELL 2

TRANSMUTATION

Traditions arcane, primal
Cast [two-actions] material, somatic
Duration 1 hour
Your mouth, esophagus, and stomach become incredibly
elastic and tougher than metal. For the duration of the spell,
you can reach down your throat to store or retrieve a single
object of light or negligible Bulk in your stomach, as though
your stomach were a backpack or other container. Storing
and retrieving an item in this way requires an Interact action.
The object must be small enough to reasonably fit within
your stomach. It is very difficult for other creatures to notice
that you are hiding an object in this way; passive observers
can’t possibly notice and you gain a +4 circumstance bonus to
your Stealth checks to Conceal the Object unless the searcher
specifically searches your mouth and stomach. If at the end
of the spell’s duration you still have an object stored in your
stomach, it is violently expelled, dealing 1d6 damage to you.
Heightened (3rd) The duration increases to 8 hours.

LIBERATING COMMAND
ENCHANTMENT

4121862

SPELL 1

MENTAL

Traditions occult
Cast [one-action] (verbal)
Range 60 feet; Targets 1 creature
You call out a liberating cry, urging an ally to break free of
an effect that holds them in place. If the target is grabbed,
immobilized, or restrained, it can immediately use a reaction
to attempt to Escape.

MESSAGE RUNE
DIVINATION

LINGUISTIC

SPELL 1
MENTAL

Traditions arcane, occult
Cast 5 minutes (material, somatic, verbal)
Range touch; Targets 1 flat unattended surface
Duration 1 day

108

19092685

4121863

4121863

19092686

19092686


You record a message up to 5 minutes long and inscribe a
special rune on any flat unattended surface within reach. The
nature of the rune’s appearance is up to you, but it is visible to
everyone and it must be no smaller than 2 inches in diameter.
You also specify a trigger that creatures must meet to activate
the rune (Pathfinder Core Rulebook 305). For the duration of
the spell, creatures who meet the criteria of the trigger can
touch the rune to hear the recorded message in their head as
though you were speaking to them telepathically. You know
when someone is listening to the message, but you do not
know who is listening to it. You can Dismiss the spell.

PENUMBRAL SHROUD
DARKNESS

SPELL 1

EVOCATION

Traditions arcane, occult
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration 10 minutes
You envelop the target in a shroud of shadow. The target
perceives light as one step lower than it actually is (bright
light becomes dim light, for example), affecting their ability
to sense creatures and objects accordingly. The shroud
also provides the target a +1 status bonus to saving throws
against light effects. While this effect is helpful to creatures
sensitive to light, if the creature is unwilling, it can attempt
a Reflex save to avoid the shroud and reduce the effect.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The effect lasts for 1 round
Failure The effect lasts its normal duration.

REFLECTIVE SCALES

SHARE LORE
DIVINATION

SPELL 1

MENTAL

Traditions arcane, occult
Cast 1 minute
Range touch; Targets up to 3 creatures
Duration 10 minutes
You share your knowledge with the touched creatures.
Choose one Lore skill in which you are trained. The targets
become trained in that Lore skill for the duration of the spell.
Heightened (3rd) The duration of the spell is 1 hour and you
can target up to five creatures.
Heightened (5th) The duration of the spell is 8 hours, you can
target up to five creatures, and you can share up to two Lore
skills in which you are trained.

SHATTERING GEM
ABJURATION

SPELL 1

EARTH

Traditions arcane, primal
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature
Duration 1 minute
A large gem floats around the target in an erratic pattern. The
gem has 5 Hit Points. Each time a creature Strikes the target,
the target attempts a DC 11 flat check. On a success, the gem
blocks the attack, so the attack first damages the gem and

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121863

SPELL 4

ABJURATION

Traditions arcane, primal
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
You grow a set of colored glowing scales or scaled
armor that stores energy before releasing
it in a final burst. When you cast this
spell, choose acid, cold, fire, electricity,
or poison damage. You gain resistance
5 against that type of damage. The
scales’ color depends on the damage
type you chose and is usually the color
of a type of dragon or other creature
associated with that damage type, such as
red or gold for fire damage.
The scales store up energy as they protect
you. Keep track of how much damage the
scales have prevented. As a 2-action activity
that has the concentrate and manipulate
traits, you can explode your scales outward
in a 20-foot radius around you, dealing 1d6
damage of the chosen type to all creatures in the
area for every 10 damage the scales have prevented,
to a maximum of 10d6 damage (after preventing 100
damage). Once you do so, the spell ends.
Heightened (+2) The resistance increases by 5 and the
maximum damage from the scale explosion increases by 5d6.

PENUMBRAL SHROUD

109

19092686

4121864

4121864


then applies any remaining damage to the target. If the gem
is reduced to 0 Hit Points, it shatters, immediately dealing the
creature that destroyed it 1d8 slashing damage (basic Reflex
save), as long as that creature is within 10 feet of the target.
Heightened (+1) The gem has 5 additional HP, and the damage
dealt by its detonation increases by 1d8.

SHIFTING SAND
EARTH

Traditions arcane, primal
Cast [three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Area a horizontal earthen or sandy surface
within a 20-foot burst
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You cause the surface to heave. The area becomes difficult
terrain and any tracks in the area are destroyed by the
churning ground. Creatures standing in the area take a –1 status
penalty to Acrobatics checks to Balance and Tumble Through
and Athletics checks to High Jump and Long Jump. When you
Sustain the Spell, you can move the churning area up to 10 feet
in any direction. Creatures immobilized by the spell are carried
along with the shifting sand in the same direction, if possible;
this movement is forced movement (Pathfinder Core Rulebook
475). Creatures that enter or begin their turn standing in the
shifting sand must attempt a Reflex save.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected and ignores the
area’s difficult terrain and penalty to skill checks until the
end of its turn.
Success The creature ignores the area’s penalty to skill checks
until the end of its turn.
Failure The creature is affected normally by the spell this turn.
Critical Failure The creature becomes immobilized within
the spell’s area until it Escapes. If the creature was
already immobilized by shifting sands, it also falls prone.
Heightened (5th) The status penalty increases to –2 and the
spell’s range increases to 60 feet.
Heightened (7th) The status penalty increases to –3, the spell’s
range increases to 60 feet, and the spell’s area increases to a
30-foot burst.
Heightened (9th) The status penalty increases to –4, the spell’s
range increases to 60 feet, and the spell’s area increases to a
40-foot burst.

19092687

19092687

SPELL 3

TRANSMUTATION

SHOCKWAVE
EARTH

SPELL 1

EVOCATION

Traditions arcane, primal
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 15-foot cone
Saving Throw Reflex
You create a wave of energy that ripples through the earth.
Terrestrial creatures in the affected area must attempt a Reflex
save to avoid stumbling as the shockwave shakes the ground.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature is flat-footed until the start of its next turn.
Failure The creature falls prone.
Critical Failure As failure, plus the creature takes 1d6 damage.
Heightened (+1) The area increases by 5 feet (to a 20-foot
cone at 2nd level, and so on).

SHOW THE WAY
DETECTION

SPELL 3

DIVINATION

Traditions divine, primal
Cast 10 minutes (material, somatic, verbal)
Area 5-foot emanation; Targets you and allies in the area
Duration 8 hours
You and affected allies gain preternatural knowledge of the
path ahead, allowing you to intuit the best way forward
and avoid potential obstacles such as difficult or confusing
terrain. For the purpose of long-distance overland travel
during exploration mode, traveling through difficult terrain
reduces you to only three-quarters your travel Speed
instead of half, and traveling through greater difficult
terrain reduces your travel Speed to only half your travel
Speed instead of one-third. Show the way does not prevent
you from falling into traps or encountering other artificial
obstacles and hazards.
Heightened (6th) For the purpose of long-distance overland
travel during exploration mode, traveling through difficult
terrain doesn’t reduce your travel Speed at all, and traveling
through greater difficult terrain reduces your travel Speed to
only three-quarters of its normal value instead of one-third.

SLOUGH SKIN

SPELL 2

NECROMANCY

Traditions arcane, primal
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 hour
You continually and harmlessly slough off the top layer of
your skin while new skin regenerates immediately, quickly
moving damaging substances away from your body. The
flat check to remove persistent damage from effects that
coat your skin (such as most persistent acid damage) is
reduced to 5, and you gain a +2 status bonus to your initial
save against contact poison (but not to further saves, since
by that point, the toxin has already entered your system).
If you’re suffering from an effect other than persistent
damage that depends on continuous contact with your
skin, if that effect allows a saving throw, you receive a
new saving throw against that effect at the end of each
turn when you attempt your flat checks against persistent
damage, and you also receive a +2 status bonus to those
saving throws.
While affected by this spell, your continually shedding
skin makes you much easier to Track. Anyone Tracking you
gains a +2 circumstance bonus to do so, and you cannot
Hide Your Tracks.

TEMPORARY TOOL

4121864

SPELL 1

CONJURATION

Traditions arcane
Cast 1 minute
Duration until used or 1 minute; see text
You conjure a temporary simple tool, such as a shovel or
rope into your hands. It lasts until it is used for a single
activity or for 1 minute, whichever comes first, after which it
disappears. The tool is obviously temporarily conjured, and
thus can’t be sold or passed off as a genuine item.

110

19092687

4121865

4121865

19092688

19092688


TETHER

SPELL 1

ABJURATION

Traditions arcane, primal
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Reflex; Duration 1 minute or until dismissed;
see text
You use magical chains, vines, or other tethers to bind your
target to you. The creature can still try to Escape, and it or
others can break the tethers by attacking them (the tethers
have AC 15 and 10 Hit Points). You must stay within 30
feet of the target while it is tethered; moving more than 30
feet away from your target ends the spell. The target must
attempt a Reflex save.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target takes a –5-foot circumstance penalty to
its Speed as long as it is within 30 feet of you.
Failure The target takes a –10-foot circumstance penalty to its
Speed and cannot move more than 30 feet away from you
until it Escapes or the spell ends.
Critical Failure The target is immobilized until it
Escapes or the spell ends.
Heightened (+1) The tethers’ AC increases by 3 and
their Hit Points increase by 10.

TIME BEACON

the benefits of the concealed condition, but only against
ranged and melee attacks. When a melee attack fails to hit
you because of the flat check for the concealed condition, the
scarves snag the weapon or unarmed attack, and the creature
takes a –1 circumstance penalty to further attacks with that
weapon or unarmed attack until the end of its turn (or the end
of its next turn, if it wasn’t the creature’s turn). The timing of the
scarves’ movement is harder to predict for ranged attackers,
so the flat check for the concealed condition against ranged
attacks increases from DC 5 to DC 6. You can Dismiss this spell.
Heightened (+2) The circumstance penalty to further attacks
with a melee weapon or unarmed attack the scarves snag
increases by 1. The DC of the flat check for the concealed
condition against ranged attacks increases by 1.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

SPELL 7

DIVINATION

Traditions arcane, occult
Cast [one-action] material
Duration until the end of your turn
You create a beacon in time,
intending to return to it if things
go wrong. You can cast time
beacon on only your turn. Keep
careful track of everything that
happens this turn after you cast
time beacon. At the end of your
turn, you can choose to rewind
time back to just after you cast time
beacon, removing all effects of your turn
since then. Curses, traps, and other harmful
effects that happen during your turn might
prevent you from returning to the beacon
if they are powerful enough. If you
suffered any harmful effects during
your turn after casting time beacon,
to return to your beacon, time beacon
attempts a counteract check against
each such effect. If it fails at any of
these checks, you can’t return.

WHIRLING SCARVES
ABJURATION

SPELL 3

4121865

WHIRLING SCARVES

FORCE

Traditions divine, occult
Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
You surround yourself in a vortex of whirling colorful scarves
of force that obfuscate you and disorient your foes. You gain

111

19092688

4121866

4121866


Domains
Though each god wields great power over many aspects
of the universe, their focus tends toward specific areas
of concern, known as domains. Worshippers who devote
themselves to a deity may be granted access to secret
spells, known as domain spells, through which they can
manifest a sliver of their deity’s power and work great
feats of magic.
This section presents spells for 18 new domains.

19092689

19092689

Domain Spell
Adapt self
Winter bolt
Withering grasp
Hyperfocus
Parch
Oathkeeper’s insignia
Redact
Charged javelin
Divine plagues
Share burden
Lament
Eject soul
Zenith star
Swarmsense
Delay consequence
Object memory
Empty inside
Draconic barrage

Advanced Domain Spell
Adaptive ablation
Diamond dust
Fallow field
Ephemeral hazards
Dust storm
Dutiful challenge
Ghostly transcription
Bottle the storm
Foul miasma
Font of serenity
Overflowing sorrow
Ectoplasmic interstice
Asterism
Swarm form
Stasis
Remember the lost
Door to beyond
Roar of the wyrm

Change
You can restructure the physical and metaphysical.

ADAPT SELF
MORPH

FOCUS 1

TRANSMUTATION

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
You make subtle changes to yourself to adapt to the situation.
Choose one of the following options that applies to you.
• If you are in water, you gain a swim Speed equal to half
your Speed.
• If you are in water, you become able to breathe water.
• If it’s too dark for you to see, you gain darkvision.
• If you are in an environment of severe heat or severe
cold, you are protected from the effects of severe heat
or severe cold, and the spell lasts 10 minutes.

ADAPTIVE ABLATION

Cold
You control ice, snow, and freezing temperatures.

WINTER BOLT
ATTACK

TABLE 1: DOMAINS
Domain
Change
Cold
Decay
Delirium
Dust
Duty
Glyph
Lightning
Plague
Repose
Sorrow
Soul
Star
Swarm
Time
Vigil
Void
Wyrmkin

resistance after you take the triggering damage, so it applies
only to future damage you take during the duration.
Heightened (+2) Increase the resistance by 5.

FOCUS 4

ABJURATION

Cast [reaction] somatic; Trigger You take acid, cold, electricity, fire,
or sonic damage.
Duration 1 minute
You shift yourself to adapt to the mystical wavelengths of the
energy damage, protecting yourself from further harm. You
gain resistance 5 to the triggering energy type; you gain this

COLD

FOCUS 1
EVOCATION

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 60 feet; Targets 1 creature or object
You fling a hollow icicle filled with winter’s wrath. Make a
spell attack against a target within range. The bolt deals
1d8 piercing damage and lodges in the target. At the end of
the target’s next turn, the bolt shatters, releasing a whirl of
snow and ice that deals 1d12 cold damage to the target and all
adjacent creatures. The bolt can be removed with an Interact
action, which causes it to melt harmlessly without detonating.
Critical Success The initial bolt deals full damage and is
especially well anchored, taking 2 Interact actions to
remove. The bolt’s explosion deals double damage.
Success The bolt and its explosion deal full damage.
Heightened (+1) The initial damage increases by 1d8 and the
secondary damage increases by 1d12.

DIAMOND DUST
COLD

FOCUS 4

4121866

EVOCATION

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 15-foot emanation centered on you
Saving Throw basic Fortitude; Duration 1 minute
You supercool the nearby air, forming a cloud of dancing ice
crystals in an emanation around you. A creature other than
you that enters the area or ends its turn within the area takes
2d6 cold damage. A creature can take this damage only once
per turn. The crystals scatter and refract light; if a light effect
enters diamond dust’s area, any creatures that effect goes on
to affect gain a +2 status bonus to AC and saves against it.
While the spell persists, you can activate or deactivate this
aura by using a single action, which has the concentrate trait.
You can Dismiss this spell.
Heightened (+2) The damage increases by 1d6.

Decay
You have the power to spoil and deteriorate matter.

WITHERING GRASP
NECROMANCY

FOCUS 1

NEGATIVE

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 creature or object
Your touch rots organic material and decays objects. Make
a melee spell attack roll. Your touch deals 1d12 negative
damage plus 1d4 persistent negative damage. If a creature
uses an item to block withering grasp, such as with the
Shield Block reaction, the item is automatically affected,
but the creature does not take damage (even if there is

112

19092689

4121867

4121867

19092690

19092690


damage left over after the shield’s Hardness). Unlike normal
negative damage, the negative damage from withering
grasp damages objects, constructs, and the like by eroding
them away.
Critical Success Your touch deals double damage (both initial
and persistent). If you target an object, lower its Hardness
by 4 for 1 minute.
Success Your touch deals full damage. If you target an object,
lower its Hardness by 2 for 1 minute.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d12 and the
persistent damage increases by 1. If you target an object,
lower its Hardness by an additional 1 point on both a success
and a critical success.

FALLOW FIELD
NECROMANCY

EPHEMERAL HAZARDS
ILLUSION

MENTAL

FOCUS 4

VISUAL

Cast [three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 60 feet
Duration 1 minute
You create illusory hazards, such as spinning blades or a
puddle of acid, in four 10-foot-by-10-foot spaces within range.
The hazards are merely a mental projection, and a creature
receives a Will save each time it touches a hazard or is
occupying one’s space at the start of its turn. Depending on
the result, the creature takes 4d6 mental damage and might
have difficulty moving through the area. A creature can take

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY

FOCUS 4

NEGATIVE

CHARACTER
OPTIONS

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 60 feet; Area 15-foot emanation
Saving Throw Will; Duration sustained up to 1 minute
A sickly yellow light fills the area as entropic forces prevent
healing. When a creature within the area would regain Hit
Points, such as from a healing effect or an ability like fast
healing or regeneration, it must attempt a Will save.
Critical Success The creature regains the full number of Hit
Points that would be restored by the healing effect, and is
temporarily immune for 1 minute.
Success The creature regains the full number of Hit Points
that would be restored.
Failure The creature regains only half the number of Hit
Points that would be restored.
Critical Failure The creature does not regain Hit Points from
the healing effect.

APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121867

Delirium
You can bring about hallucinations and restlessness.

HYPERFOCUS

FOCUS 1

DIVINATION

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Will; Duration varies
You sharpen a creature’s senses, though more distant objects
become hazy, indistinct, or muted to it. The target gains a
+1 status bonus to Perception checks attempted with any of
its precise senses. Furthermore, any imprecise senses the
target has are sharpened to precise senses (though they do
not receive the status bonus). However, the target cannot
perceive anything beyond a range of 20 feet with any of its
senses. The duration is determined by the target’s Will save.
You can allow allies to choose the outcome instead of rolling
a saving throw.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is affected for 1 round.
Failure The target is affected for 1 minute.
Critical Failure As failure, but the target cannot perceive
anything beyond a range of 10 feet.
Heightened (3rd) You can target up to 2 creatures.
Heightened (6th) You can target up to 4 creatures.

WINTER BOLT

113

19092690

4121868

4121868


this damage only once per turn, even if it moves through
several hazards. Choose bludgeoning, slashing, piercing,
acid, cold, electricity, fire, or sonic damage when you cast
ephemeral hazards; resistances and weaknesses to those
damage types apply if the target thinks they do, as judged by
the GM. You can freely choose the appearance and damage
type of each hazard as long as its appearance reflects the
type of damage it deals (for instance, a hazard that deals
piercing damage might take the form of sharpened spikes).
Critical Success The creature is unaffected by the hazards
and no longer needs to attempt Will saves against them.
Success The creature realizes the hazards aren’t real but still
takes half damage from them; on future Will saves against
the hazards, the creature continues to use this result
unless it rolls a critical success.
Failure The target takes full damage and treats the square as
difficult terrain.
Critical Failure The target takes double damage and cannot
pass through a square containing a hazard.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d6.

Dust
You have the power to dry and crumble what opposes you.

PARCH
AIR

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 60 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Fortitude
Dry winds dehydrate a creature. The target must attempt
a Fortitude save; if used on a creature with the water trait or
a creature made primarily of liquid (such as many oozes), the
creature uses the outcome for one degree of success worse
than the result. Creatures whose bodies contain no significant
moisture (such as earth elementals) are immune to parch.
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target takes a –1 status penalty to its checks and
DCs for 1 round.
Failure The target takes a –1 status penalty to its checks and
DCs for 1 minute.
Critical Failure The target takes a –2 status penalty to its
checks and DCs for 1 minute and is dazzled as long as it
has this penalty.
If a creature affected by parch drinks a liquid, such as a
swig of water or a potion, the spell ends. Affected creatures
that have the water trait or are made primarily of liquid, as
well as affected creatures that can’t drink, can end the effect
as a two-action activity, which has the concentrate trait.
Heightened (4th) You can target up to 4 creatures.

19092691

19092691

FOCUS 1

EVOCATION

DUST STORM
AIR CONJURATION

FOCUS 4
NONLETHAL

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 120 feet; Area 20-foot-radius burst
Duration 1 minute
You call forth a swirling storm of dust. The dust storm
obscures vision, with the effect of obscuring mist. The dust
also makes the air unbreathable; creatures in the area must

hold their breath (Core Rulebook 478), though wearing a scarf
or similar clothing over the mouth increases the time the
creature can hold its breath to 5 rounds. Creatures entering
or starting their turn in the dust storm take 1d6 slashing
damage. Creatures that have the water trait or that are made
primarily of liquid take double damage.
Heightened (+2) The damage increases by 1d6.

Duty
You defend oaths and carry out your divine missions
with great dedication.

OATHKEEPER’S INSIGNIA

FOCUS 1

CONJURATION

Cast [free-action] verbal; Trigger You make a promise or deal.
Duration 1 hour
A magical indicator assures a creature that you’ve upheld your
end of a bargain. When you Cast the Spell, you create a bracelet,
flower, or other such trinket. If, while the spell persists, you
complete the terms of the promise or deal you made, the trinket
fades away with a pleasant chime; if you violate the terms
instead, the trinket breaks with a dissonant crash.
Heightened (3rd) The duration becomes 1 day.
Heightened (5th) The duration becomes 1 week.
Heightened (7th) The duration becomes 1 month.
Heightened (9th) The duration becomes 1 year.

DUTIFUL CHALLENGE

FOCUS 4

4121868

ABJURATION

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration 1 minute
As you challenge an enemy, you take some of its attention
away from your allies. The target takes a –1 status penalty to
attack rolls, damage rolls, and skill checks against creatures
other than you, and you take a –1 status penalty to attack
rolls, damage rolls, and skill checks against creatures other
than the target. Each time a creature other than you uses a
hostile action that affects the challenged enemy, the enemy
can attempt a Will save. On a success, the enemy no longer
takes the penalty against that creature. You can Dismiss the
spell, and it ends automatically if you or the target is defeated.
Heightened (+3) The status penalties increase by 1.

Glyph
You wield power over written words and symbols.

REDACT

FOCUS 1

TRANSMUTATION

Cast [two-actions] material, somatic
Range 30 feet; Targets unattended written materials of up to
1 Bulk or less
Duration 1 day
You strike mention of a specific name from one or more
documents. When you cast the spell, give one proper name,
be it a creature, location, or object. Any mention of that
name within the document becomes blurred, smudged, or
otherwise completely illegible. Epithets and unambiguous

114

19092691

4121869

4121869

19092692

19092692


references to the name are redacted as well; for instance,
redacting the name of the goddess Sarenrae from a book
would also remove references to her title “the Dawnflower.”
Heightened (3rd) Instead of striking out a given name, you
can replace it with a different name you choose. Epithets and
references are substituted with similar ones relating to the
replacement name. Anyone reading the text can attempt a
Perception or Society check against your spell DC to notice the
altered text, though that doesn’t tell them what the original said.
Heightened (4th) At your choice, the duration is unlimited.

GHOSTLY TRANSCRIPTION
ILLUSION

FOCUS 4

VISUAL

Cast [two-actions] material, somatic
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature
Duration 1 minute
Glowing letters assemble in the air, providing a transcription of
the target’s speech in all languages you speak. For the spell’s
duration, any words spoken aloud by the target are spelled
out in letters in front of them. When you Cast the Spell, you
can choose whether these letters are visible to all creatures
or only certain creatures you specify. Any words the target
mouths silently are similarly spelled out, allowing the target
to communicate silently or in areas where sound doesn’t
carry. This even allows the target to provide verbal casting
components in such areas, but only if you choose to make the
letters visible to all creatures. Furthermore, any of the target’s
auditory abilities can affect creatures even in areas where
sound does not carry as long as you have made the glyphs
visible to them and they have line of sight to the target; in this
case, they gain the visual trait. You can Dismiss the spell.

Lightning
You control electricity, thunder, and storms.

CHARGED JAVELIN
ELECTRICITY

FOCUS 1

EVOCATION

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 60 feet; Targets 1 or more creatures
You fire a javelin of electricity that leaves a charged field
around its target. Make a spell attack roll. The javelin deals
1d6 electricity damage and 1 persistent electricity damage.
Critical Success The javelin deals double damage, both initial
and persistent.
Success The javelin deals full damage.
As long as the target is taking persistent damage from this
spell, creatures gain a +1 status bonus to attack rolls with metal
weapons or electricity effects against the target, and the target
takes a –1 status penalty to saves against electricity effects.
Heightened (+1) The initial damage increases by 1d6, and the
persistent damage increases by 1.

BOTTLE THE STORM
ELECTRICITY

FOCUS 4

EVOCATION

Cast [reaction] somatic; Trigger You would take electricity damage.
Duration 1 minute
When lightning is turned at you, you store the charge safely
within yourself, unleashing it when the time is right. You gain

electricity resistance 10 against the triggering effect. If you
successfully prevent damage in this way, at any time during the
spell’s duration, you can spend a single action, which has the
attack trait, to expend the charge and make a melee spell attack
at an adjacent target or a ranged spell attack at a target within
60 feet. This attack deals electricity damage equal to the damage
prevented by bottle the storm. If you cast bottle the storm a
second time before the original duration elapses, or if you do not
make this attack, the stored charge dissipates harmlessly.
Heightened (7th) The resistance increases to 15, and you can
immediately make the spell attack roll granted by bottle the
storm as part of the reaction used to cast the spell.
Heightened (10th) The resistance increases to 20, and you
can immediately make the spell attack roll granted by bottle
the storm as part of the reaction used to cast the spell.

PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY

Plague

CHARACTER
OPTIONS

You wield disease and pestilence like a weapon.

DIVINE PLAGUES
DISEASE

FOCUS 1

NECROMANCY

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 15 feet
Saving Throw Fortitude
Your deity sends wracking plagues. The target must attempt
a Fortitude save. When you Cast the Spell, decide whether the
disease inflicts the clumsy, enfeebled, or stupefied condition.
Success The target is unaffected.
Failure The target is afflicted with divine plague at stage 1.
Critical Failure The target is afflicted with divine plague at
stage 2.
Divine Plague (disease) Level 1; Stage 1 clumsy 1, enfeebled
1, or stupefied 1 (1 round); Stage 2 slowed 1 and clumsy
1, enfeebled 1, or stupefied 1 (1 round); Stage 3 clumsy 1,
enfeebled 1, or stupefied 1 and the target can’t recover from
the condition until they are cured (1 day)
Heightened (5th) The divine plague disease gains the virulent
trait. The condition value for the clumsy, enfeebled, or
stupefied condition is 2 instead of 1.

FOUL MIASMA
DISEASE

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES

APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121869

FOCUS 4

NECROMANCY

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature affected by a disease
Saving Throw Will; Duration 1 minute
You multiply the disease within a creature, drawing it into an
infectious mist outside their body where it can spread to other
creatures. The target must attempt a Will save. If the target is
willing, it can choose to take the effects of critical failure.
Critical Success The target receives the benefit of a successful
save against the lowest-level disease affecting it.
Success The target is unaffected.
Failure One randomly chosen disease affecting the target fills
the air in a 15-foot emanation centered on the target. For
the spell’s duration, any creature that enters or ends its
turn within the area is exposed to that disease.
Critical Failure As failure, except the miasma contains all the
diseases affecting the target.

115

19092692

4121870

4121870


Repose
You ease mental burdens.

SHARE BURDEN
ABJURATION

FOCUS 1

MENTAL

Cast [reaction] somatic
Trigger An ally within 30 feet is about to attempt a saving
throw against a harmful emotion effect, and you would not
otherwise have to save against the effect.
You shoulder some of your ally’s pain. Both you and your

FONT OF SERENITY
ABJURATION

EMOTION

FOCUS 4
MENTAL

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Area 15-foot emanation
Duration 1 minute
A divine beacon radiates serenity, soothing nearby allies.
Allies within the area gain a +1 status bonus to saving throws
against emotion effects. An ally can touch the font as an
Interact action; if they do so, the spell attempts to counteract
one emotion effect affecting the ally of the ally’s choice, after
which that emotion effect is temporarily immune for 1 day.
If the spell succeeds at the counteract check, it removes the
emotion effect from your ally, though not from any other
creatures the effect might be affecting.
Heightened (+4) The bonus increases by 1.

Sorrow
You have a painful connection to melancholy
and sadness.

LAMENT
AUDITORY

FOCUS 1
EMOTION

ENCHANTMENT

MENTAL

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30-foot cone; Targets 1 or more creatures
Saving Throw basic Will
You let out your negative emotions in a guttural wail that shakes
your enemies’ hearts and deals 1d8 mental damage (basic Will
save). If you have any harmful conditions imposed by emotion
effects, lament deals additional mental damage equal to the
counteract level of the highest-level effect.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d8.

19092693

19092693

ally use the outcome one degree of success better than the
result of your ally’s saving throw, even if the triggering effect
usually affects only one target.

OVERFLOWING SORROW
EMOTION

GHOSTLY TRANSCRIPTION

ENCHANTMENT INCAPACITATION

4121870

FOCUS 4
MENTAL

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 15-foot emanation, centered on you
Saving Throw Will; Duration sustained up to 1 minute
Sadness flows out of you into nearby creatures, blotting out
any other thoughts they had. The first time a creature begins
its turn in the area or enters the area, it must attempt a Will
save. If it later leaves and reenters the area, it uses the same
effect as before.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature takes a –1 status penalty to skill checks
and Perception checks as long as it remains in the area.
Failure While the creature is in the area, any emotion effects
of lower counteract level than overflowing sorrow are
suppressed, and whenever the creature attempts to use an
emotion action or cast an emotion spell, it must succeed at
a DC 11 flat check or the action or spell is disrupted.
Critical Failure As failure, but the creature cannot use
emotion actions or spells.
Heightened (+2) When you Cast the Spell, you can choose to
increase the area by 5 feet.

116

19092693

4121871

4121871

19092694

19092694


Soul
You wield power over the spiritual.

EJECT SOUL
INCAPACITATION

FOCUS 1
NECROMANCY

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range touch; Targets 1 living creature that has a soul
Your touch disrupts the connection between body and soul,
possibly forcing the soul out of the body altogether. The target
must attempt a Fortitude save. You can allow allies to choose
the degree of success instead of rolling a saving throw.
Success The target is unaffected.
Failure The target is stunned 1 as its soul briefly loses its
connection to its body.
Critical Failure The target’s soul exits its body for 1 round. The
target’s body becomes stunned. While its body is stunned
in this way, the target remains fully aware in soul form; it
simply can’t consciously move its body (though the body
makes basic instinctual defensive movements). The target’s
soul has the incorporeal trait, is invisible, and has a fly Speed
of 60 feet. It can’t attack, cast spells, or attempt any skill
checks that require a physical body, and it must always
maintain line of effect to its body. When the target’s body
ceases being stunned, the target’s soul instantly returns to
its body as the target wakes.
Heightened (+3) If a willing ally chooses to critically fail, it
can stay in soul form for 1 additional round.

ECTOPLASMIC INTERSTICE

FOCUS 4

NECROMANCY

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Area 15-foot emanation
Duration sustained up to 1 minute
You force the Material and Ethereal Planes to partially overlap,
creating a zone that causes incorporeal and spiritual entities
to take on many of the aspects of corporeal creatures. Within
the ectoplasmic interstice, incorporeal creatures cannot
pass through solid objects or corporeal creatures, and they
can manipulate and attempt Strength-based checks against
physical creatures and objects. An incorporeal PC or other
creature with a normal Strength modifier simply uses that
modifier, but if the creature had a Strength modifier of –5,
like most incorporeal monsters, it uses a +4 modifier instead,
increasing its Athletics modifier by 9 accordingly. Attacks
against creatures that are within the interstice overcome
resistances as if they were by ghost touch weapons.

Star
You command the power of the stars.

ZENITH STAR
DIVINATION

FOCUS 1
LIGHT

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 60 feet; Targets 1 creature
Saving Throw Fortitude; Duration 1 day
You call a tiny star to orbit a creature in a sparkling halo before
shooting up into the heavens, where it marks the creature’s
rough location. The target must attempt a Fortitude save.

Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is dazzled for 1 round.
Failure The target is dazzled for 1 round. While the spell
persists, as long as you can see the night sky and the
target is visible from the same night sky, you can sense
the approximate direction and distance to the creature
by using a single action, which has the concentrate trait.
This is exact enough to track the creature, but not pinpoint
their exact square (for instance, to make an attack). You
can set a number of zenith stars equal to your Wisdom
modifier; if you exceed this number, your oldest zenith star
is automatically Dismissed.
Critical Failure As failure, but the target is blinded for 1 round.
Heightened (+1) The duration increases by 1 day.
Heightened (4th) You ignore the concealed condition against
targets marked by zenith star.

ASTERISM
EVOCATION

FOCUS 4

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX

LIGHT

Cast [three-actions] material, somatic, verbal
Range 150 feet
Saving Throw basic Reflex; Duration 1 minute
Lines of burning starlight form a constellation around you.
Draw five lines, one at a time; each line must anchor at you or
a creature or object already connected to a previous line, and
it must end at a creature or object within 30 feet of its anchor
(possibly allowing the asterism to extend to its full 150‑foot
range). A creature that begins its turn in one of these lines or
enters one of these lines on its turn takes 4d6 fire damage
(basic Reflex save). A creature can take this damage only once
per turn, even if it moves through several lines. Targets that are
part of the asterism do not take damage from it. If the distance
between two targets (or you and a target) ever exceeds 30 feet,
the line of starlight between the two breaks, and any lines that
now no longer have a direct path back to you also break. You
can Dismiss the spell.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d6.

INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121871

Swarm
You exert control over masses of creatures.

SWARMSENSE

FOCUS 1

DIVINATION

Cast 1 minute (somatic, verbal)
Duration sustained
You extend your senses through a multitude of crawling and
flying creatures. You create a crawling swarm in your square.
You can hear through the swarm as if using your normal
auditory senses. The first time you Sustain the Spell each
round, you can move the swarm 10 feet along the ground in
any direction. The swarm has AC 15 and a +0 bonus to its
saves. Any damage dealt to the swarm destroys it and ends
the spell.
Heightened (3rd) The swarm has the benefits of spider climb.
Heightened (5th) The swarm has a fly Speed of 10 feet. You
can see through the swarm using your visual senses.
Heightened (7th) The swarm gains a 10-foot status bonus to
its Speeds.

117

19092694

4121872

4121872


SWARM FORM
TRANSMUTATION

FOCUS 4

POLYMORPH

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 5 minutes
You discorporate into a swarm of Tiny creatures. While in
swarm form, you have the swarm trait and you gain resistance
5 to slashing and piercing damage and weakness 5 to area and
splash damage. You can fit into spaces only a few inches wide,
moving your constituent creatures through the gap.
You don’t gain the swarm mind ability, so you are still
affected normally by mental effects. As a swarm,
you can’t speak, cast spells, use manipulate
actions requiring your hands, activate your

Time
You reign over the flow of time.

DELAY CONSEQUENCE

FOCUS 1

ABJURATION

Cast [reaction] somatic; Trigger A creature or object within range is
hit by an attack.
Range 30 feet; Targets the triggering creature
Duration 1 round
You transpose the moment that the target would be injured
to later in its timestream. Roll damage normally, but do not
reduce Hit Points or apply any other effects of the
attack until the spell’s duration has elapsed. When
the spell ends, the target is immediately affected
by the attack, taking damage and being
affected by any additional effects. You
can Dismiss this spell.

STASIS
INCAPACITATION

FOCUS 4
TRANSMUTATION

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 30 feet; Targets 1 creature or up to 1 Bulk of objects
Saving Throw Reflex; Duration varies
The flow of time congeals around an object or creature,
holding it in place. The target must attempt a Will save (an
unattended object automatically critically fails its save).
Critical Success The target is unaffected.
Success The target is stunned 1 as time thickens around it.
Failure Time ceases to pass for the target for 1 round. It
is invulnerable to all damage, it cannot be targeted
or affected by anything, and no rounds elapse for
any timed durations, conditions, afflictions, and
other effects it has. While in stasis, the target
can’t be moved, and it remains fixed in
place, defying gravity if need be.
Critical Failure As failure, but the target
is held in stasis for 3 rounds. At the
end of each of its turns, it can attempt a Will
save to reduce the remaining duration by 1 round
or end it entirely on a critical success.

19092695

19092695

magic items, or make any of your Strikes with your normal
body. You can Dismiss the Spell.
Heightened (+2) Increase your resistances and weaknesses
each by 5.

4121872

Vigil
You watch over those long passed and guard their secrets.

OBJECT MEMORY
DRACONIC BARRAGE

FOCUS 1

DIVINATION

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal; Targets 1 weapon or tool
Duration 1 minute
By touching an object, you draw forth the experience of
those who created and used it. If you touch a weapon, your
proficiency rank with that weapon temporarily increases
to trained (if it is not already higher). If you touch a tool,
your proficiency rank with the next skill check you attempt

118

19092695

4121873

4121873

19092696

19092696


with that tool (such as a Crafting check with a blacksmith’s
hammer) within the spell’s duration temporarily increases to
trained (if it is not already higher). This spell has no benefit
for activities that take longer than a minute to complete.
Heightened (6th) Your proficiency rank increases to expert
instead of trained.

REMEMBER THE LOST
DIVINATION

FOCUS 4

MENTAL

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 30-foot-radius emanation centered on you
Saving Throw basic Will
You call upon the lost and forgotten, assailing your foes’ minds
with the memories of those who died with a grievance toward
them. Enemies in the area take 6d6 mental damage (basic
Will save) and are frightened 1 on a critical failure. If you
know the names of anyone murdered or grievously wronged
by an enemy in the area, you can chant those victims’ names
when you cast the spell to improve the clarity of the visions,
increasing the damage to the corresponding enemy from 6d6
to 6d10; you can do so for multiple enemies if you know victims
of each enemy. The visions are personal to each foe in the area,
and you can’t use this spell to discern a murderer by guessing
a name. A creature that truly knows no one who died with any
sort of grievance to that creature is immune to this effect.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 2d6 (or 2d10 to an
enemy when you name a specific victim).

Void
You draw power from emptiness.

EMPTY INSIDE
ABJURATION

FOCUS 1

MENTAL

Cast [one-action] verbal
You inject a sliver of the void into your mind, momentarily
remaking it into a bleak and empty place. Attempt a
counteract check against one emotion effect affecting you.
Heightened (5th) You can attempt counteract checks against
any number of emotion effects affecting you.

DOOR TO BEYOND

FOCUS 4

CONJURATION

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Range 5 feet; Area 20-foot emanation
Saving Throw Fortitude; Duration 1 minute
Striking at thin air, you create hairline cracks in an unoccupied
adjacent space that lead somewhere outside reality. Air
rushes through the cracks, drawing Large or smaller creatures
and objects of light Bulk or less toward the center. Large or
smaller creatures in the area must attempt a Fortitude save at
the start of their turn; creatures that move into the area must
attempt the save on entering.
Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure The creature is pulled 10 feet toward the door.
Critical Failure The creature is pulled 20 feet toward the door.
The cracks of the door to beyond are too thin for anything
to fully slip through, but decompressive effects deal 4d6
slashing damage to any creature or object that ends its turn

in the door’s space. You are unaffected by your own door to
beyond. You can Dismiss the spell.
Heightened (+1) The damage increases by 1d6.

Wyrmkin
You draw on the power of dragons, linnorms, and other
powerful reptilian creatures.

DRACONIC BARRAGE

FOCUS 1

EVOCATION

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Duration 1 minute
You shape energy into one incorporeal tiny dragon (or
serpentine creature) that flits around you. The specific dragon
is random; roll 1d6 on the table below for each dragon evoked
to determine which type of dragon you create. While the spell
persists, you can command one of your dragons to spit a missile
of energy at a creature within 60 feet by using a single action,
which has the concentrate trait. This is a ranged Strike that
uses your spell attack bonus and deals 1d6 damage plus your
spellcasting ability modifier, with the damage type depending
on the dragon. A dragon’s breath Strike uses and contributes to
your multiple attack penalty. Once a dragon has used its breath
Strike, it winks out of existence; when you have no dragons
remaining, the spell ends.
Heightened (+1) You shape 1 additional dragon, and the Strike
damage increases by 1d6.
D6
Dragon
Breath Strike Type
1
Copper or black
Acid
2
Silver or white
Cold
3
Bronze or blue
Electricity
4
Brass, gold, or red
Fire
5
Green
Poison
6
Your choice of dragon
As the dragon

ROAR OF THE WYRM
AUDITORY

EMOTION

ENCHANTMENT

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121873

FOCUS 4
MENTAL

Cast [two-actions] somatic, verbal
Area 30-foot emanation
Saving Throw Will; Duration varies
You channel the might of dragons into your voice, letting out
a roar that engenders respect in dragonkind but that instills
fear in most other creatures. The impressive roar grants you
a +2 circumstance bonus to Diplomacy checks for 10 minutes
against dragons that were in the area at the time of casting.
All enemies within the area other than dragons must attempt
a Will save; to these enemies, roar of the wyrm is a fear effect.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature is frightened 1.
Failure The creature is frightened 2.
Critical Failure The creature is frightened 3 and fleeing for
1 round.
Roar of the wyrm affects non-dragon creatures with deep
ties to dragonkind (such as a barbarian with the draconic
instinct, a sorcerer with the draconic bloodline, or a member
of a culture that reveres dragons) as if they had the dragon
trait. The GM decides if a creature is aligned enough with
dragonkind to be affected in this way.

119

19092696

4121874

4121874


Items and Weapons
Champions, clerics, and other faithful employ a variety
of holy (and unholy) instruments to demonstrate the
majesty of their deity and triumphantly vanquish the
foes of their faith.

FAVORED WEAPONS

Weapon Descriptions

The weapons detailed in the tables below are
described here.
Bladed Scarf: The thin metal plates
interwoven throughout this long
scarf turn a fashion accessory into
a deadly weapon.
Bola: This throwing weapon
consists of weights tied to the
BLADED SCARF
Weapon Traits
end of long cords, which can be
The weapons in this section include the following
used to bludgeon foes or entangle
new traits.
their legs.
Modular: The weapon has multiple configurations
Fighting Fan: This fan is useful
that you can switch between using an Interact
for elegant dances as well as for slicing
action. Typically, switching between configurations of
unsuspecting foes with the blades along
a modular weapon allows it to deal different types of
its outer edge. If used in performances, it
damage (listed in the trait, such as “modular B, P, or S”),
might be disguised as a frilly accessory, or it might be an
though it’s possible for a modular
obvious, though elegant, weapon.
weapon’s description to list more
Khopesh: This curved sickle sword has a pointed
complicated configurations.
tip, allowing it to be swung like a handaxe or thrust
Ranged Trip: The weapon can be used
like a short sword. The tip of a khopesh is usually
to Trip with the Athletics skill at a
hooked so that it can be used to disarm
distance up to the weapon’s first
an opponent’s shield or weapon.
range increment. The skill check
Machete: This medium-length
POLYTOOL
is attempted with a –2 circumstance penalty. You
sword has a wide blade and long grip.
can add the weapon’s item bonus to attack rolls as a
Though it is typically used to hack through heavy foliage,
bonus to the check. As with using a melee weapon to
the machete can also be used as a deadly weapon.
The following weapons are favored by
adherents of various faiths
(see the Favored Weapon
entries in the deity stat
blocks in the Appendix
beginning on page 124).

19092697

19092697

Trip, a ranged trip weapon doesn’t deal any damage
when used to Trip. This trait usually appears only on a
thrown weapon.

4121874

TABLE 2: MARTIAL MELEE WEAPONS
Weapon
Machete
Meteor hammer
War razor

Price
7 sp
3 gp
3 sp

Damage
1d6 S
1d8 B
1d4 S

Bulk
L
2
L

Hands
1
2
1

Group
Sword
Flail
Knife

Weapon Traits
Deadly d8, sweep
Backswing, disarm, reach, trip
Agile, backstabber, deadly d8, finesse

Hands
2
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1

Group
Flail
Knife
Sword
Axe
Polearm
Sword
Sword
Brawling
Flail

Weapon Traits
Disarm, reach, sweep, trip
Agile, backstabber, deadly d6, finesse, monk
Trip
Disarm, deadly d8, thrown 20 feet
Deadly d8, reach, versatile P
Disarm
Agile, modular B, P, or S
Agile, disarm, finesse, parry, trip
Deadly d10, sweep

Hands
1

Group
Sling

Weapon Traits
Nonlethal, ranged trip, thrown 20 feet

TABLE 3: UNCOMMON MARTIAL MELEE WEAPONS
Weapon
Bladed scarf
Fighting fan
Khopesh
Mambele
Naginata
Nine-ring sword
Polytool (level 1)
Tekko-kagi
Urumi

Price
3 gp
11 sp
2 gp
6 sp
3 gp
9 sp
10 gp
2 sp
2 gp

Damage
1d8 S
1d4 S
1d8 S
1d6 S
1d8 S
1d8 S
1d6 modular
1d4 S
1d6 S

Bulk
1
L
1
1
2
1
1
L
2

TABLE 4: UNCOMMON MARTIAL RANGED WEAPONS
Weapon
Bola

Price
5 sp

Damage
1d6 B

Bulk
L

120

19092697

4121875

4121875

19092698

19092698


Mambele: Also known as a hunga munga or danisco,
This immaculate golden set of merchant’s scales is
this hybrid knife-axe consists of a hilt and a blade
considered a divine instrument among Abadar’s most
that curves backward toward the wielder. The curve
faithful. Unlike most scales, this one has only a single dish
of the blade is such that after a victim has been struck
for placing small objects, and calculates value rather than
by a mambele, more damage is dealt as the weapon is
weight. On the other side of the fulcrum, a steel arrow
extracted from the victim’s body.
indicator points to various numbers engraved on the side of
Meteor Hammer: This weapon consists of a long chain
the scale. By placing an object of light Bulk onto the dish,
connected to a heavy weight at one end. When a wielder
you can determine its value in gold pieces in the market in
swings the weight by the chain, it builds momentum and
which the scale was made (most of these scales are made
can serve as a deadly bludgeon with incredible reach.
in Katapesh or Absalom), based on its material composition
Naginata: This 6-foot staff has a 2-foot-long,
and artisanship. For example, after placing a gemstone on
slightly curved, swordlike blade attached at one
the dish, the scale will indicate the fairest (average, in most
end. The long pole helps keep the wielder out of
cases) price you can expect to fetch in the market to which
reach of swords and shorter weapons.
the scale is calibrated, but the scale wouldn’t detect the
Nine-Ring Sword: This sword has a broad blade,
gemstone’s historical significance or any magical
along which are threaded nine heavy
properties. Abadar’s flawless scale can be
metal rings. The rings add weight to
calibrated to a different market by performing
the weapon for downward swings, as
a 1-hour ritual in the proximity of that market.
well as clashing together to make noise.
Polytool: The polytool is a small
BOTTOMLESS STEIN
ITEM 2
metal rod with a number of simple
UNCOMMON CONJURATION MAGICAL
tools folded inside. The user can extend
Price 25 gp
a long ceramic blade, as well as an
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
awl, a chisel, a file, flint and steel, a
Access follower of Cayden Cailean
hook, an inkpen, a magnifying glass,
A magic item regarded as holy by followers
pliers, scissors, and a small saw. The flint and steel
of Cayden Cailean, this ornate metallic stein
can be used up to 10 times before needing to be
is always filled to the brim with delicious ale,
replaced. Though inspired by advanced
no matter how much is drunk or spilled. If it
Numerian technology, the polytool is
is emptied (such as by being gulped quickly
ABADAR’S FLAWLESS SCALE
a simple enough feat of metalworking
or upended onto the floor), the bottomless
that any blacksmith could produce it—
stein will fill again within 1 round as long as
perfect for the goddess Casandalee to spread innovation
it is right side up, though it’s impossible to transfer the ale to
farther than actual Numerian tech could reach.
another container to sell it or store it for later. The exact type
Tekko-kagi: Four curved blades attached
of ale with which the stein is filled is determined at the item’s
to a sturdy handlebar give the wielder of
creation, and cannot be changed thereafter.
this close-combat weapon the illusion of
having claws that extend from their fist.
DAGGER OF ETERNAL SLEEP
ITEM 5
UNCOMMON
CONSUMABLE
MAGICAL
NECROMANCY
Adherents of Bastet favor the tekko-kagi
for catching their foes off guard.
Price 25 gp
Urumi: A bouquet of whiplike
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
blades extends from the
Access follower of Achaekek
hilt of this sword.
This tiny serrated dagger looks like
War Razor: A war razor
a miniature sawtooth sabre. Until
is an exaggerated version
activated, it is too small and ornamental
of the barbers’ tool. It is a
to function as a weapon, which
brittle but extremely sharp weapon that
might allow it to be passed off as a
METEOR HAMMER
is very easy to slip into a pocket or sleeve.
weapon-shaped decoration.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Effect You
MAGIC ITEMS
transform the dagger of eternal sleep into a +1 grievous
The following magic items see use among adherents
striking dagger and Strike an unconscious target with
of different deities as well as impious adventurers who
the dagger. If you are not in an encounter or otherwise
simply want to channel the might of the gods.
threatened and you roll a hit with your Strike, you get a
critical hit instead. The damage from the Strike and the
ABADAR’S FLAWLESS SCALE
ITEM 3
bleed from the critical specialization effect do not awaken
the target, though the target becomes temporarily immune
UNCOMMON
DIVINATION
MAGICAL
Price 50 gp
to this effect until the next time it wakes up, meaning
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk 1
further daggers of eternal sleep awaken it as normal. The
Access follower of Abadar
dagger disintegrates immediately after use.

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121875

121

19092698

4121876

4121876


DETERIORATING DUST
UNCOMMON

ITEM 4+
MAGICAL

This +2 holy greater striking glaive has a long, multi-tailed
rainbow-colored banner affixed to the butt of the pole
in the style of Shelyn’s religious symbol. While wielding
the glaive, you gain a +2 item bonus on Crafting and
Performance checks.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Frequency once per round; Effect You
furl one of the colored tails around the pole, causing the
glaive to gain the effects of your choice of the corrosive,
flaming, frost, shocking, or thundering property runes for
1 round, depending on the tail you chose.
Activate [two-actions] Interact; Frequency once per day; Effect
You thrust the blade of the glaive into the ground,
activating the power of the banner. (The blade can
penetrate any non-metallic surface when used in this
way, and does not leave a mark when withdrawn.)
As long as the glaive is thrust into the ground and
standing upright, all allies within 60 feet who can
see the glaive’s banner gain a +2 item bonus to
Performance checks.

Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk —
Access follower of Rovagug
Contained in a specially enchanted small leather or hide sack,
deteriorating dust is a potent caustic agent and a prized item
among Rovagug’s more discreet followers.
Activation [two-actions] Interact; Effect You sprinkle the deteriorating
dust over an unattended Medium or smaller object. The
dust quickly fades to a transparent color and the object
immediately begins to rust, melt, or otherwise fall apart.
For the listed time, the object takes constant damage; if
the object has a Hardness, then the dust gradually reduces
the object’s Hardness instead. If the deteriorating dust is
still active after the object’s Hardness is reduced to 0, it
deals damage to the object as previously described. If
the object survives, reduced Hardness returns after the
dust’s duration expires, but any damage remains.
Type deteriorating dust; Level 4; Price 15 gp
The affected object takes 1 damage per 3 hours (8
damage per day) and its Hardness is reduced by
LUCKY RABBIT’S FOOT
ITEM 10
UNCOMMON CONSUMABLE
DIVINATION
FORTUNE
1 per hour. The effect lasts for 3 days.
MAGICAL
TALISMAN
Type extended deteriorating dust;
Level 6; Price 45 gp
Price 175 gp
The affected object takes 1
Usage affixed to armor;
damage per 3 hours (8 damage
Bulk —
DREADSMOKE THURIBLE
per day) and its Hardness is reduced
Activate [reaction] envision;
by 1 per hour. The effect lasts for 1 week.
Trigger You fail a Reflex
Type caustic deteriorating dust; Level 9; Price 105 gp
save against a damaging effect.
The affected object takes 1 damage per hour (24 damage per
Access follower of Desna
day) and its Hardness is reduced by 1 per hour. The effect
This treated rabbit’s foot has shockingly blue fur and is often
lasts for 3 days.
carried by vagabonds who worship Desna. When you
activate the foot, reroll the triggering Reflex save. If
DREADSMOKE THURIBLE
ITEM 9
you fail the second roll as well, you can Stride up to
UNCOMMON
MAGICAL NECROMANCY
your Speed.
Price 600 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk 1
MANACLES OF PERSUASION
ITEM 3
UNCOMMON
MAGICAL NECROMANCY NONLETHAL
Access follower of Urgathoa
This black-and-gray thurible is decorated
Price 45 gp
with a skeleton motif; the jaw of one of the
Usage worn on wrists; Bulk 1
decorative skulls unhinges, allowing you to
Access follower of Zon-Kuthon
load it with incense as an action. A long, thin
These sturdy, average manacles are connected
chain is connected to the top of the thurible.
by a thick iron chain that is much heavier
Activate [two-actions] Interact; Cost incense worth at
than its appearance suggests at a glance.
least 5 gp; Effect You swing the thurible around
Followers
of
Zon-Kuthon
you, spreading inky black smoke in a 20-foot
sometimes employ manacles
LUCKY RABBIT’S FOOT
emanation that has the effect of obscuring mist.
of persuasion against captured
Undead creatures can see through the smoke as if it
enemies and spies. When the
didn’t exist. Negative energy also disrupts the magic of
manacles are locked around an immobilized
the smoke; anyone who uses a negative effect, along with
creature’s wrists, they begin to sap the life
creatures affected by a negative effect, can see through the
out of the victim, dealing 2 negative damage per hour until
smoke for 1 round.
the creature falls unconscious. The effect is nonlethal, so
the damage doesn’t cause the creature to become dying.
GLAIVE OF THE ARTIST
ITEM 14 While the creature is unconscious, the manacles deal
UNCOMMON ENCHANTMENT
MAGICAL
no damage and allow the creature to recover Hit Points
Price 4,000 gp
normally to a maximum of 10 Hit Points, at which point the
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk 2
manacles begin to deal damage once more. The manacles
Access follower of Shelyn
have no effect on a creature that is not immobilized.

19092699

19092699

CONSUMABLE EVOCATION

4121876

122

19092699

4121877

4121877

19092700

19092700


MITER OF COMMUNION
UNCOMMON

DIVINATION

INVESTED

ITEM 10
MAGICAL

Price 800 gp
Usage worn headwear; Bulk L
This ornate headgear comes in many
different shapes and sizes, though
most are elaborately decorated with
motifs of the deity whose honor in
which it was made. The miter brings
you spiritually closer to your deity’s
servitors, granting you a +2 item bonus
to Religion checks.
Activate 1 minute (command); Frequency
once per week; Effect You
chant for a minute about a task
at hand for the coming week
to cast a 4th-level read omens spell
that grants you cryptic but useful advice.

MORTAR OF HIDDEN MEANING
DIVINATION

RAT-CATCHER TRIDENT
UNCOMMON

CONJURATION

ITEM 11
MAGICAL

Price 1,200 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
Access follower of Hanspur
The haft of this +2 striking
trident is carved with
intricate
designs
of
swarming rodents sacred to
Hanspur, the drowned god of the Sellen
River. When used against a swarm, it ignores the
MITER OF COMMUNION
swarm’s resistance to piercing damage, if any.
Activate [one-action] Interact; Frequency once per day;
Effect While floating down a river on a raft or boat,
you plunge the rat-catcher trident into the water. The trident
casts a 5th-level control water spell on the body of water.

ITEM 4

MAGICAL

necklace are as effective as ordinary steel daggers and can
be useful to stake vampires.

SINGING BOWL OF THE VERSATILE STANCE

ITEM 11

UNCOMMON ENCHANTMENT
MAGICAL
Price 75 gp
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
Price 1,175 gp
This matching mortar and pestle are made
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk L
from immaculate darkwood that looks
Access follower of Irori
nearly olive in the right light.
In true Iroran form, the simplicity of this small,
Activate 1 minute (Interact);
inverted copper bell belies its flawlessness.
Frequency once per hour; Effect You use
When struck with a mallet (included with the
the mortar of hidden meaning to grind tea
singing bowl), it emits a harmonious tone
leaves (or another suitable substance for
that inspires bodily perfection in those
NECKLACE OF KNIVES
making a hot beverage). While grinding
who know how to hear it.
the tea leaves, which takes no less than
Activate [one-action] Interact (auditory); Effect
1 minute, you can speak a message into the
While holding the singing bowl of the
mortar. After the leaves are steeped in hot water,
versatile stance with one hand, you strike
the first person who drinks from the resulting brew
the lip of it with a mallet held in the other.
hears the message whispered in their ear.
Anyone within 60 feet currently in a stance can
spend a reaction to use one of their stance actions in
NECKLACE OF KNIVES
ITEM 2
order to change to a different stance.
UNCOMMON

CONJURATION

INVESTED

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121877

MAGICAL

Price 25 gp
TORAG’S SILVER ANVIL
ITEM 18
UNCOMMON
DIVINE
MAGICAL
TRANSMUTATION
Usage worn; Bulk —
Access follower of Pharasma
Price 24,000 gp
This necklace strung with
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk 2
miniature stone throwing knives.
Access follower of Torag
As long as you wear it, you are
This portable silver anvil has a
never without a weapon, a crude
narrow hoop on one end, through
surgical tool, or stake for a vampire,
which a long, sturdy chain has been strung.
if necessary in following Pharasma’s teachings.
Torag’s Silver Anvil can be wielded as
Activate [one-action] Interact Effect You pluck a
a +3 holy greater flaming greater
miniature knife from the necklace, and
striking silver meteor hammer.
it grows into a normal stone, steel, or
Outside of combat, the anvil
wooden dagger for as long as
can be used with a hammer as an
TORAG’S SILVER ANVIL
you hold it, fading away
incredibly effective portable forge,
1 round after it leaves
heating up the metal to be forged without
your hand. No matter
a furnace and granting a +3 item bonus to Crafting checks
how many knives you pull
involving metalworking. When you use the anvil to successfully
from the necklace, you never
Repair a metal item, the item recovers an additional 10 Hit
seem to deplete them. Wooden daggers from the
Points (or an additional 20 on a critical success).

123

19092700

4121878

4121878


Appendix
ANCIENT OSIRIAN GODS
Deity

Alignment

Title

Domains

Cleric Spells

Favored Weapon

Anubis
Bastet

LN (LG, LN, N)
CN (N, CG, CN)

Guardian of the Tomb
The Sly Enchantress

1st: unseen servant, 3rd: shifting sand *, 5th: wall of stone
1st: pest form (cats only), 3rd: animal vision, 4th: private sanctum

Flail
Claw or tekko-kagi *

Bes

NG (LG, NG, CG)

The Guardian Fool

Death, protection, souls *, vigil *
Nature, passion, protection,
trickery
Earth, family, luck, protection

1st: sleep, 2nd: hideous laughter, 3rd: enthrall

Mambele *

Hathor

CG (NG, CG)

Mistress of Jubilation

Family, passion, sun, wealth

1st: charm, 2nd: tree shape, 8th: uncontrollable dance

Shortsword

Horus

LN (LG, LN, NG, N)

The Distant Falcon

Air, moon, protection, sun

1st: floating disk, 3rd: wall of wind, 4th: aerial form (bird only)

Khopesh *

Isis

NG (LG, NG, CG)

Queen of Miracles

Family, healing, magic, passion

Staff

Ma’at

LN (LG, LN, N)

The Feather of Truth

Osiris

LG (LG, NG)

Lord of the Living

Knowledge, protection, stars *,
truth
Change *, healing, nature, souls *

1st: soothe, 2nd: humanoid form, 3rd: animal vision, 4th: creation,
5th: control water, 6th: wall of force, 7th: magnificent mansion,
8th: wind walk, 9th: shapechange
1st: feather fall, 4th: resilient sphere, 5th: mind probe

Ra

LN (LG, LN, N)

King of the Heavens

Fire, nature, sun, time *

Sekhmet

CN (N, CG, CN, CE)

Lady of Slaughter

Selket

CG (NG, CG, CN)

Sobek

CN (N, CG, CN, CE)

Mistress of the Beautiful
House
The Raging Torrent

Thoth

LN (LG, LN, N)

Lord of Divine Words

1st: burning hands, 2nd: flaming sphere, 3rd: threefold aspect
(Advanced Player’s Guide)
Destruction, healing, indulgence, 1st: true strike, 4th: wall of fire, 5th: moon frenzy
might
Healing, magic, nature,
1st: soothe, 3rd: paralyze, 6th: purple worm sting
protection
Might, protection, water,
1st: hydraulic push, 3rd: feet to fins, 4th: dinosaur form (appears
wyrmkin *
as crocodile)
Glyph *, knowledge, magic, moon 1st: message rune *, 2nd: comprehend language, 3rd: secret page

Wadjet

LG (LG, NG)

The Green Empress

Protection, travel, water, zeal

1st: soothe, 2nd: false life, 6th: tangling creepers

1st: mage armor, 2nd: animal form (snake only), 4th: fly

Starknife
Flail
Spear
Claw or battleaxe
Whip
Falchion
Sickle
Light mace

19092701

19092701

4121878

ARCHDEVILS
Deity

Alignment

Title

Domains

Cleric Spells

Baalzebul

LE (LE)

Lord of Flies

Air, ambition, magic, trickery

Spear

Barbatos

LE (LE)

The Bearded Lord

Magic, nature, travel, tyranny

1st: fleet step, 2nd: vomit swarm (Advanced Player’s Guide),
6th: mislead
1st: magic fang, 3rd: paralyze, 4th: clairvoyance

Belial

LE (LE)

The Pale Kiss

Change  *, passion, trickery, zeal

1st: charm, 2nd: humanoid form, 3rd: enthrall

Ranseur

Dispater

LE (LN, LE)

Iron Lord

Cities, confidence, duty *, tyranny 1st: tether *, 4th: suggestion, 6th: flesh to stone

Mace

Geryon

LE (LE)

The Serpent

Might, truth, water, wyrmkin *

War flail

Mammon

LE (LE)

The Argent Prince

Ambition, creation, toil†, wealth

1st: acidic burst *, 2nd: animal form (snake only), 3rd:
hypercognition
1st: shattering gem *, 4th: creation, 7th: magnificent mansion

Mephistopheles LE (LE)

The Crimson Son
The Ashen Bull

1st: message rune *, 2nd: blistering invective (Advanced Player’s
Guide), 5th: subconscious suggestion
1st: burning hands, 5th: acid storm *, 7th: fiery body

Trident

Moloch

Glyph *, knowledge, secrecy,
tyranny
Destruction, duty *, fire, might

Domains

Cleric Spells

LE (LE)

Favored Weapon
Staff

Spear

Whip

DEMON LORDS
Deity

Alignment

Title

Abraxas

CE (NE, CE)

Master of the Final Incantation Destruction, knowledge, magic,
wyrmkin *

Favored Weapon

Angazhan

CE (CE)

The Ravenous King

Baphomet

CE (CN, CE)

Lord of the Labyrinth

Destruction, might, nature,
tyranny
Indulgence, might, secrecy, zeal

Cyth-V’sug

CE (CE)

Prince of the Blasted Heath

Change *, decay *, nature, plague * 1st: summon plant or fungus, 2nd: fungal hyphae *, 5th: plant form

Scimitar

Dagon

CE (CN, CE)

The Shadow in the Sea

Change *, destruction, water, zeal 1st: hydraulic push, 3rd: feet to fins, 6th: chain lightning

Trident

Gogunta

CE (CE)

Song of the Swamp

Whip

Kabriri

CE (NE, CE)

Him Who Gnaws

Indulgence, might, tyranny,
1st: jump, 3rd: stinking cloud, 5th: black tentacles
water
Indulgence, knowledge, undeath, 1st: jump, 2nd: expeditious excavation *, 3rd: paralyze
vigil *

1st: share lore *, 2nd: spectral hand, 3rd: hypercognition, 4th:
reflective scales *, 5th: black tentacles, 6th: feeblemind, 7th: spell
turning, 8th: unrelenting observation, 9th: disjunction
1st: magic fang, 3rd: animal form (ape only), 5th: moon frenzy

Whip
Spear

1st: summon animal, 2nd: enlarge, 8th: maze

Glaive

Jaws or flail

124

19092701

4121879

4121879


* New option presented in this book; † Pathfinder Adventure Path #148

Divine Ability
Dexterity or Wisdom
Intelligence or
Charisma
Constitution or
Charisma
Strength or Charisma

Divine Skill Divine Font Key Edicts
Occultism
Deception

Harm or heal
Heal

Performance

Heal

Performance

Heal

Strength or Charisma

Diplomacy

Heal

Wisdom or Charisma

Arcana

Heal

Intelligence or Wisdom

Society

Heal

Constitution or
Wisdom

Nature

Heal

Strength or
Intelligence
Strength or Wisdom

Society

Heal

Medicine

Harm or heal

Dexterity or Wisdom

Medicine

Heal

Strength or
Constitution
Intelligence or Wisdom

Athletics

Harm or heal

Arcana

Harm or heal

Dexterity or Wisdom

Nature

Heal

Key Anathema

Lay bodies to rest, destroy undead, be impartial in judgment
Learn secrets, tempt others into revelry, kill harmful snakes and evil
spirits, heal diseases
Aid childbirths, spread joy and celebration, protect sleeping
creatures
Give wealth to new families, aid traders and miners, support
musicians, protect and encourage lovers

Desecrate a corpse, rob a tomb, trap a soul
Kill or abuse a house cat, abandon a child, choose to marry

Protect those you have authority over, maintain harmony in your
community
Provide aid to the sick and wounded, use magic to help others,
mourn the cherished dead, ritually purify yourself before entering
sacred areas
Defend civilization from chaos, live an honest and just life, be impartial in
judgment and reveal the truth
Ensure the health of crops and vegetation, protect the bodies and
souls of the worthy dead, avenge the wrongly murdered

Undermine a rightful ruler, serve a usurper

Harm or neglect a child, separate families, use magic to corrupt
dreams
Discriminate or slight someone based on appearance, intentionally
disfigure a creature, refuse food to the starving

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES

Reveal sacred rites to the uninitiated, betray your children or your
lover, discriminate based on social status

PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY

Deal unfairly with your family or community, destroy the
environment, lie
Dismember a creature, desecrate a corpse, show ingratitude for a
sincere gift

CHARACTER
OPTIONS

Bring order to places of chaos, kill evil monsters and fiends,
Avoid personal change, kill a plant or a creature with cold damage,
encourage just laws, provide warmth where needed
seal a building to completely block sunlight
Slaughter your enemies, drink the blood of defeated foes, heal battle Spare an evil fiend, fail to placate Sekhmet with daily rituals
injuries
Avenge the wronged, protect the dead and the vulnerable, use
Poison someone you didn’t intend to, harm a creature as punishment
poison and suffocation, heal others
for a different creature’s crime, desecrate a corpse
Take what you want, indulge in base desires, feast on luxurious
Cower from fights, despoil the land, kill the innocent
food, kill demons and evil creatures
Maintain order in society and the multiverse, innovate scientific and Upset stable mechanisms or ecosystems, fail to correct false
magical knowledge, record events
information
Defend your homelands and your people, aid childbirths, grow
Refuse to help a drowning creature, harm a rightful ruler
papyrus, protect sources of clean water

APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

19092702

19092702

4121879

Divine Ability

Divine Skill Divine Font Key Edicts

Dexterity or Charisma

Deception

Harm

Constitution or
Wisdom
Intelligence or
Charisma
Strength or Charisma

Nature

Harm

Diplomacy

Harm

Society

Harm

Intelligence or Wisdom

Occultism

Harm

Wisdom or Charisma

Thievery

Harm

Intelligence or
Charisma
Strength or
Constitution

Deception

Harm

Athletics

Harm

Divine Ability

Convey yourself with regal dignity, claim what you desire and
deserve, seek vengeance from those who wrong you
Veil your motives, make dangerous deals, offer incomplete and
ruinous knowledge
Indulge your basest desires, create deadly weapons

Key Anathema
Provoke Baalzebul’s envy, show humility

Hide any plot against your masters, close or interfere with portals
to Hell
Impede an act of high hedonism, become too attached to a lover or
project
Uphold absolute law, pursue perfection in your surroundings, speak Act above your station, neglect your defenses, betray a lover
with refinement
Hoard knowledge, test the boundaries of taboo, spread falsehoods Declare knowledge heresy or forbidden, break your word
to dupe the foolhardy
Gain financial control over others, gather new wealth, count your
Leave the cult of Mammon, allow those who steal from you to go
riches
unpunished
Master laws and use them to your benefit, enable the desperate,
Break a contract you made, get caught breaking the law
excoriate others with veiled mockery
Spread Hell’s order through war, convert communities to sole
Defy a military superior, flee in battle (unless ordered to do so), lose
worship of Moloch, sacrifice creatures in fire
your combat edge due to your vices

Divine Skill Divine Font Key Edicts

Key Anathema

Intelligence or Wisdom

Arcana

Harm

Learn and hoard forbidden magic, steal secrets from others

Strength or
Constitution
Intelligence or Wisdom

Athletics

Harm

Survival

Harm

Constitution or
Wisdom
Strength or
Constitution
Strength or Wisdom

Nature

Harm or heal

Athletics

Harm

Intimidation

Harm

Stealth

Harm

Commit acts of brutal violence, test yourself against nature, make
Cower from fights, allow yourself to be resurrected instead of
animals more dangerous
reincarnated
Confuse paths and roads, outwit your foes instead of overpowering Kill something that cannot significantly harm you, bargain with
them, pace labyrinths
Asmodeus
Corrupt all that exists with parasites or fungus, promote the growth Purify your food, cure a disease or kill a parasite, tolerate another
of fungus, feast on rotten flesh or fungus
demon lord or their servants (except Treerazer)
Swim underwater, improve your own strength, encourage the spread Break a sworn oath, settle in a land-locked area, share Dagon’s
of dangerous sea monsters
secrets with outsiders
Sacrifice creatures by drowning them, sing in the swamps, aid
Grant mercy to boggards who worship other gods
amphibians
Eat the flesh of your own kind
Reveal secrets of the dead to nonbelievers, despoil grave markers

Dexterity or
Intelligence

Destroy forbidden lore, reveal the entirety of a secret

125

19092702

4121880

4121880


Kostchtchie

CE (NE, CE)

The Deathless Frost

Cold *, destruction, might, zeal

1st: chilling spray *, 2nd: enlarge, 5th: cone of cold

Nurgal

CE (NE, CE)

The Shining Scourge

Destruction, dust *, fire, sun

1st: burning hands, 2nd: flaming sphere, 3rd: cup of dust *

Pazuzu

CE (CE)

King of the Wind Demons

Air, swarm *, trickery, tyranny

1st: gust of wind, 3rd: suggestion, 4th: fly

Treerazer

CE (NE, CE)

Lord of the Blasted Tarn

Greataxe

Shax

CE (NE, CE)

The Blood Marquis

Destruction, nature, nightmares, 1st: grim tendrils, 3rd: wall of thorns, 6th: tangling creepers
tyranny
Ambition, death, pain, trickery 1st: phantom pain, 2nd: invisibility, 3rd: haste

Sifkesh

CE (NE, CE)

The Whispered Doubt

1st: ill omen *, 4th: crushing despair, 5th: subconscious suggestion

War razor *

Zevgavizeb

CE (NE, CE)

The Glutton in the Dark

Zura

CE (NE, CE)

The Vampire Queen

Nightmares, pain, sorrow *,
trickery
Destruction, might, nature,
wyrmkin *
Delirium *, indulgence,
nightmares, undeath

1st: charm, 4th: gaseous form, 6th: dominate

Mace
Longsword

Dagger

Spiked gauntlet
Rapier

DWARVEN GODS
Deity

Alignment

Title

Domains

Cleric Spells

Angradd

LG (LG, LN)

The Forge-Fire

Fate, fire, protection, zeal

Greataxe

Bolka

NG (LG, NG, CG)

The Golden Gift

Confidence, family, healing,
passion

1st: burning hands, 2nd: blistering invective (Advanced Player’s
Guide), 3rd: fireball
1st: soothe, 4th: creation, 6th: collective transposition

Dranngvit

LN (LN, LE)

The Debt Minder

Knowledge, might, travel, vigil *

1st: longstrider, 2nd: knock, 5th: passwall

Light pick

Droskar

NE (LE, NE, CE)

The Dark Smith

Duty *, earth, trickery, tyranny

1st: ant haul, 3rd: haste, 6th: dominate

Light hammer

Folgrit

LG (LG, LN, NG)

The Watchful Mother

Cities, family, repose *, protection 1st: endure *, 4th: fire shield, 9th: resplendent mansion

Grundinnar

LG (LG, NG)

The Peacemaker

1st: anticipate peril *, 4th: resilient sphere, 6th: wall of force

Light hammer

Kols

LN (LG, LN)

Oath-Keeper

Confidence, family, protection,
truth
Duty *, knowledge, might, truth

1st: unseen servant, 4th: suggestion, 8th: unrelenting observation

Light hammer

Magrim

LN (LG, LN, N)

The Taskmaster

Death, duty *, glyph *, fate

Warhammer

Trudd

NG (LG, NG)

The Mighty

Confidence, duty *, might,
protection

1st: temporary tool *, 2nd: expeditious excavation *, 9th:
earthquake
1st: endure *, 3rd: haste, 4th: stoneskin

Deity

Alignment

Title

Domains

Cleric Spells

Count Ranalc

CN (N, CG, CN, CE)

The Traitor

1st: penumbral shroud *, 4th: private sanctum, 5th: shadow walk

Rapier

The Green
Mother
Imbrex

NE (NE, CE)

The Feasting Flower

1st: charm, 4th: suggestion, 5th: plant form

Sickle

LN (LN, LE, N)

The Twins

Confidence, darkness, sorrow *,
travel
Decay *, indulgence, nature,
passion
Dreams, earth, family, might

1st: mindlink, 2nd: mirror image, 4th: stoneskin

War flail

The Lantern
King
The Lost Prince

CN (CN, CE)

The Laughing Lie
The Melancholy Lord

1st: illusory disguise, 2nd: hideous laughter, 6th: baleful
polymorph
1st: soothe, 4th: modify memory, 5th: crushing despair

Dagger

N (NG, N)

Magdh

LN (LN, N)

The Three

Change *, delirium *, passion,
trickery
Knowledge, repose *, sorrow *,
vigil *
Fate, glyph *, knowledge, truth

Scythe

Ng

N (N)

The Hooded

Gauntlet

Ragadahn

CE (NE, CN, CE)

The Water Lord

1st: hydraulic push, 3rd: feet to fins, 6th: purple worm sting

Whip

Shyka

N (LN, NG, N,
NE, CN)

The Many

Knowledge, magic, secrecy,
travel
Destruction, vigil *, water,
wyrmkin *
Decay *, delirium *, fate, time *

1st: anticipate peril *, 3rd: threefold aspect (Advanced Player’s
Guide), 6th: scrying
1st: pass without trace, 2nd: invisibility, 4th: blink

Title

19092703

19092703

1st: magic fang, 4th: dinosaur form, 8th: earthquake

Warhammer

Favored Weapon
Mace

Staff

4121880

Warhammer

ELDEST

1st: anticipate peril *, 3rd: haste, 7th: time beacon *

Favored Weapon

Staff

Light mace

ELEMENTAL LORDS
Deity

Alignment

Domains

Cleric Spells

Atreia

NG (LG, NG, N, CG) The Lambent King

Fire, healing, protection, sun

1st: soothe, 3rd: ghostly weapon, 4th: fire shield

Ayrzul

NE (LE, N, NE, CE)

The Fossilized King

Hshurha

NE (LE, N, NE, CE)

Duchess of All Winds

Destruction, earth, might,
secrecy
Air, cold *, destruction, dust *

Kelizandri

NE (LE, N, NE, CE)

The Brackish Emperor

Lysianassa

NG (LG, NG, N, CG) Empress of the Torrent

1st: shockwave *, 2nd: summon elemental (earth only), 6th: flesh
to stone
1st: gust of wind, 2nd: summon elemental (air only), 4th: gaseous
form
1st: fear, 2nd: summon elemental (water only), 4th: hydraulic
torrent
1st: hydraulic push, 3rd: aqueous orb (Advanced Player’s Guide),
5th: control water

Destruction, nightmares, travel,
water
Change *, fate, nature, water

Favored Weapon
Katar
Morningstar
Longbow
Trident
Spear

126

19092703

4121881

4121881

19092704

19092704


* New option presented in this book; † Pathfinder Adventure Path #148

Strength or
Constitution
Constitution or
Charisma
Dexterity or Charisma

Athletics

Harm

Avenge all slights three times over, kill all witches

Survival

Harm

Wage war in the desert, deny water to your foes

Make a deal with Baba Yaga or her children, defer to or obey a
woman
Heal a sunburn, change your name

Diplomacy

Harm

Tempt others to immoral acts, revel in flight, possess or magically
influence others to cause calamities
Corrupt plant life, slay elves, feast on rotten flesh or fungus

Deny a flying creature the ability to fly, abuse Pazuzu’s name or call
on Pazuzu for help, aid worshippers of Lamashtu
Grant mercy to elves, plant trees, encourage natural plant growth
Sleep in a building with fewer than five rooms, allow a victim to
escape due to gloating
Spread hope, offer forgiveness, sincerely honor or call upon another
god
Favor stealth over shows of strength, eat cooked meat

Strength or
Constitution
Dexterity or Charisma

Survival

Harm or heal

Intimidation

Harm

Plot and commit murders, tell lies, torture creatures

Wisdom or Charisma

Deception

Harm

Strength or
Constitution
Strength or Charisma

Survival

Harm

Spread doubt among the faithful, ruin the reputation of religions,
provoke wrongdoers to suicide instead of allowing for redemption
Slaughter the cowardly, subjugate the weak

Diplomacy

Harm

Drink blood, seek vampirism, cause bleed damage

Divine Ability
Strength or
Constitution
Wisdom or Charisma

Divine Skill Divine Font Key Edicts
Athletics

Heal

Diplomacy

Heal

Constitution or
Wisdom
Constitution or
Intelligence
Constitution or
Wisdom
Constitution or
Charisma
Strength or Wisdom

Intimidation

Harm or heal

Crafting

Harm

Medicine

Heal

Diplomacy

Heal

Society

Harm or heal

Constitution or
Wisdom
Strength or
Constitution

Crafting

Heal

Athletics

Heal

Divine Ability

Seek and destroy evil, study evil to learn the best way to destroy it,
train others in righteous ways
Encourage those seeking love, seek the beauty in others, support
others’ relationships

Stealth

Harm or heal

Constitution or
Charisma
Constitution or
Wisdom
Intelligence or
Charisma
Intelligence or Wisdom

Nature

Harm or heal

Occultism

Harm or heal

Deception

Harm or heal

Society

Harm or heal

Intelligence or Wisdom

Occultism

Wisdom or Charisma

Key Anathema
Allow weaker evils to survive due to the presence of larger evils,
deceive others outside of tactical gain
Betray your spouse, disrupt a genuine marriage, prevent a suitor
from seeking a partner

Help reclaim just debts, seek appropriate vengeance against
Allow a slight to go unrecognized, avoid repaying a debt, force
transgressions
others into debts you know are unpayable
Achieve goals at any cost, continually improve your abilities,
Fail to work toward goals or grow in skill, relax excessively or give
establish dominance, work ceaselessly
in to sloth
Maintain the sanctity of a home, remain patient with others, take in Abandon your family, fail to defend your neighbors
those without families
Attempt to bridge the gap between feuding sides, maintain just
Sow discord among friends and allies, attack during parley
treaties, maintain relations with neighbors
Seek those that break oaths and enforce just restitution, uphold
Lie, dishonor yourself or your family, shirk your duties, break an
your promises
oath
Perfect a craft or trade, carve runes, destroy undead, aid others with Treat gravesites irreverently, mistreat your tools, create undead,
completing unfinished tasks
damage a soul
Offer your strength to aid others, protect those weaker than you
Engage in petty showcases of strength, use your strength to take
advantage of others

Divine Skill Divine Font Key Edicts

Dexterity or Charisma

Expose vampires, heal a bloody wound without drinking blood from
it first

OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

4121881

Key Anathema

Work in shadows, hide your nature and motives, plot betrayals or
revenge for betrayals
Frolic in vegetation, manipulate people, use what you kill, prey on
the weak
Pursue your own goals, bring things to their proper ending, split
things in half or otherwise create pairs
Play pranks, seek new jokes, leave lit lanterns in unusual places

Ask for forgiveness, create permanent or long-lasting sources of
light
Hold a secret for too long, discriminate against sex workers or use
their trade to harm them
Offend Imbrex

Harm or heal

Aid the depressed, wear somber clothing, maintain neutrality,
ruminate on the past
Use divination

Abandon someone who has no family, take public credit for your
good deeds
Lie, share your divinations without payment (no matter how trivial)

Survival

Harm or heal

Travel, hide your identity and your motives

Strength or Wisdom

Occultism

Harm or heal

Dexterity or
Intelligence

Occultism

Harm or heal

Draw spirals, seek primordial secrets, use poison, always carry
water
Learn from the past, leave hourglasses in unusual places, give
random gifts, create ephemeral things

Sleep in the same place twice in a row, wear seasonal decorations
out of season
Suffer a linnorm’s death curse, destroy a fossil

Be completely honest, ruin or explain a good joke

Willingly tread where time does not pass

Divine Ability

Divine Skill Divine Font Key Edicts

Key Anathema

Wisdom or Charisma

Performance

Heal

Strength or
Constitution
Strength or Dexterity

Deception

Harm

Stealth

Harm

Constitution or
Charisma
Dexterity or
Constitution

Athletics

Harm

Deny a suffering creature warmth, shade, or water; abandon a
creature in darkness
Remove a creature’s petrified condition, make a fire larger or hotter
than necessary
Deny a flying creature the ability to fly, walk on the earth if you
could easily travel otherwise
Destroy a body of water, use magic to calm the waves

Survival

Heal

Burn away corruption, clear the way for new growth, purify tainted
areas
Use the strength of stone to protect yourself and your secrets,
obscure your true motives, slowly poison others
Revel in formlessness and freedom, humiliate terrestrial creatures,
kill foes via falling or hazards from high winds
Instill hydrophobia in others, kill your foes by drowning them,
sacrifice treasures to the depths of the ocean
Respect and aid natural cycles, promote life and growth, change to
avoid stagnation, swim

GODS &
MAGIC

Pollute clean bodies of water, dam a river, disrespect sincere gifts of
water or drink

127

19092704

4121882

4121882


NG (LG, NG, N, CG) Zephyrous Prince

Air, freedom, lightning *, travel

1st: liberating command *, 4th: fly, 6th: chain lightning

Whip

Sairazul

NG (LG, NG, N, CG) The Crystalline Queen

Earth, family, toil†, wealth

1st: shattering gem *, 2nd: expeditious excavation *, 4th: stoneskin

Pick

Ymeri

NE (LE, N, NE, CE)

Queen of the Inferno

Destruction, dust *, fire, zeal

1st: burning hands, 2nd: summon elemental (fire only), 4th: wall
of fire

Longsword

Title

ELVEN GODS
Deity

Alignment

Domains

Cleric Spells

Findeladlara

CG (NG, N, CG, CN) The Guiding Hand

Cities, creation, family, stars *

1st: temporary tool *, 4th: shape stone, 7th: magnificent mansion

Ketephys

CG (NG, CG)

Darkness, moon, nature, secrecy 1st: pass without trace, 2nd: invisibility, 3rd: animal vision

Longbow

Yuelral

NG (LG, NG, N, CG) The Wise

Creation, earth, knowledge,
magic

1st: shattering gem *, 2nd: shape wood, 3rd: meld into stone, 4th:
speak with plants, 5th: tree stride, 6th: tangling creepers, 7th:
unfettered pack, 8th: prismatic wall, 9th: nature’s enmity

Dagger

The Hunter

Favored Weapon
Staff

EMPYREAL LORDS

19092705

19092705

Ranginori

Deity

Alignment

Title

Domains

Cleric Spells

Andoletta

LG (LG, NG)

Grandmother Crow

Arshea

NG (LG, NG, CG)

Spirit of Abandon

1st: shillelagh, 4th: aerial form (bird only), 6th: collective
transposition
1st: mage armor, 2nd: humanoid form, 5th: dreaming potential

Ashava

CG (NG, CG)

The True Spark

Family, knowledge, protection,
sorrow *
Confidence, freedom, passion,
perfection
Darkness, moon, repose *, souls *

1st: soothe, 2nd: glitterdust, 8th: uncontrollable dance

Bladed scarf *

Black Butterfly

CG (NG, CG)

The Silence Between

Freedom, secrecy, stars *, void *

1st: penumbral shroud *, 2nd: blur, 4th: blink

Starknife

Cernunnos

CG (LG, NG, CG)

The Horned Lord

Lightning *, nature, passion, zeal

1st: true strike, 2nd: animal form, 3rd: lightning bolt

Longbow

Dammerich

LG (LG)

The Weighted Swing

Death, duty *, truth, vigil *

1st: true strike, 3rd: paralyze, 4th: stoneskin

Greataxe

Eritrice

NG (LG, NG, CG)

Heart-Speaker

Falayna

LG (LG, NG, CG)

Warrior’s Ring

Confidence, glyph *, knowledge, 1st: mindlink, 2nd: comprehend languages, 3rd: enthrall
truth
Creation, freedom, might, wealth 1st: true strike, 3rd: ghostly weapon, 5th: cloak of colors

Halcamora

NG (LG, NG, N)

Lady of Ripe Bounty

Irez

NG (LG, NG, N, CG) Lady of Inscribed Wonder

Jaidz

NG (LG, NG, N, CG) Fearless Claw

Korada

NG (NG, N)

The Open Hand of Harmony

Lymnieris

LG (LG, NG, CG)

The Auroral Tower

Pulura

CG (NG, CG)

Ragathiel

Indulgence, luck, nature, swarm * 1st: summon plant or fungus, 2nd: touch of idiocy, 4th: speak
with plants
Fate, glyph *, luck, magic
1st: anticipate peril *, 2nd: mirror image, 3rd: secret page

Favored Weapon
Staff
Flail

Dagger
Longsword
Club

4121882

Dart

1st: longstrider, 3rd: haste, 7th: mask of terror

Shortsword

1st: soothe, 3rd: slow, 4th: resilient sphere

Fist

1st: mage armor, 3rd: threefold aspect (Advanced Player’s Guide),
4th: resilient sphere
1st: color spray, 5th: chromatic wall, 6th: teleport

Longsword

The Shimmering Maiden

Confidence, nightmares,
protection, travel
Change *, healing, magic,
protection
Change *, passion, protection,
repose *
Cold *, darkness, sorrow *, stars *

LG (LG)

General of Vengeance

Destruction, duty *, fire, zeal

1st: true strike, 3rd: haste, 4th: fire shield

Bastard sword

Shei

NG (LG, NG, CG)

The Ibis Matron

NG (LG, NG, N, CG) The Mystic Angel

1st: liberating command *, 3rd: hypercognition, 5th: dreaming
potential
1st: summon construct, 3rd: meld into stone, 4th: stoneskin

Sickle

Soralyon
Tanagaar

LG (LG, LN)

The Aurulent Eye

Family, freedom, healing,
perfection
Creation, earth, magic,
protection
Darkness, duty *, nature, zeal

Kukri

Vildeis

LG (LG)

The Cardinal Martyr

Duty *, pain, sorrow *, zeal

Dagger

Winlas

LG (LG, LN, NG)

The Elder of Divinity

Ylimancha

NG (LG, NG, N, CG) Harborwing

Glyph *, knowledge, protection,
vigil *
Air, nature, travel, water

1st: pass without trace, 3rd: animal vision, 4th: aerial form (bird
only)
1st: phantom pain, 2nd: slough skin * (appears as streams of
blood), 5th: synaptic pulse
1st: share lore *, 2nd: comprehend language, 4th: veil
1st: feather fall, 3rd: feet to fins, 4th: fly

Longbow

Zohls

LG (LG, LN, NG)

Verity

Ambition, cities, knowledge,
truth

1st: share lore *, 3rd: hypercognition, 7th: retrocognition

Deity

Alignment

Title

Domains

Cleric Spells

Apollyon

NE (LE, NE, CE)

Prince of Locusts

Air, decay *, plague *, swarm *

Charon

NE (LE, NE, CE)

The Boatman

Sling

Pick

Mace

Heavy crossbow

HORSEMEN
1st: goblin pox, 2nd: vomit swarm (Advanced Player’s Guide), 5th:
cloudkill
Death, knowledge, souls *, water 1st: grim tendrils, 4th: crushing despair, 9th: weird

Favored Weapon
Scythe
Staff

128

19092705

4121883

4121883

19092706

19092706


* New option presented in this book; † Pathfinder Adventure Path #148

Dexterity or Charisma

Acrobatics

Heal

Constitution or
Charisma
Strength or Charisma

Nature

Heal

Intimidation

Harm

Open closed areas to fresh air, travel throughout your surroundings
daily, fly or make creations that fly
Shelter others within stone and earth, care for Sairazul’s children,
aid childbirths, mine responsibly
Inspire your lessers with zeal and strategy, be passionate and quick
of wit, destroy your foes with fire

Wrongfully imprison a creature, restrain a creature longer or more
tightly than is necessary, suffocate a creature
Damage subterranean natural wonders, collapse an earthen
structure on a creature
Extinguish destructive blazes, allow yourself to stagnate or lose
motivation

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW

Divine Ability

Divine Skill Divine Font Key Edicts

Charisma or
Intelligence
Dexterity or Wisdom

Crafting

Heal

Survival

Heal

Intelligence or Wisdom

Arcana

Heal

Divine Ability

Divine Skill Divine Font Key Edicts

Wisdom or Charisma

Society

Heal

Constitution or
Charisma
Dexterity or Charisma

Diplomacy

Heal

Performance

Heal

Dexterity or Wisdom

Stealth

Heal

Strength or
Constitution
Constitution or
Wisdom
Intelligence or
Charisma
Strength or Charisma

Survival

Heal

Athletics

Harm or heal

Diplomacy

Heal

Athletics

Heal

Nature

Heal

Constitution or
Wisdom
Dexterity or
Intelligence
Strength or Wisdom

Arcana

Heal

Intimidation

Heal

Wisdom or Charisma

Diplomacy

Heal

Wisdom or Charisma

Society

Heal

Constitution or
Wisdom
Strength or Charisma

Survival

Heal

Intimidation

Harm or heal

Intelligence or
Charisma
Strength or
Intelligence
Strength or Wisdom

Society

Heal

Arcana

Heal

Stealth

Heal

Constitution or
Charisma
Intelligence or Wisdom

Medicine

Harm or heal

Occultism

Heal

Dexterity or Wisdom

Acrobatics

Heal

Intelligence or Wisdom

Society

Heal

Divine Ability
Strength or
Constitution
Constitution or
Intelligence

Preserve elven art and architecture, bless and secure households,
inspire and aid others with your works
Hunt and kill demons and undead, maintain the health of the forest,
provide for your community
Practice herbalism, use and enchant gems, encourage and teach
magicians and jewelers, preserve elven magic and knowledge

Harm

Occultism

Harm

Break the laws of hospitality, allow a guest to bring harm to your
family
Take more than needed from the wilderness, hunt an animal for
sport, aid Treerazer or his minions
Cut a gem for aesthetic purposes, defile nature, allow the
irresponsible use of magic

Key Anathema

Respect elders, instill good virtues in children, seek and allow
Hold a grudge, mock the dead, pass judgment hastily or carelessly
redemption
Inspire passion, comfort and free the repressed, seek your true self Judge another based on sexual desires or gender roles, harm another
and desires
in pursuit of passion
Dance even when there is no music, cast light in places of darkness, Intentionally mislead someone, desecrate graves, abandon a
lead the lost
creature in darkness
Study the stars, notice moments of silence, perform anonymous acts Disrupt another’s meditation, interrupt tranquil moments, play noisy
of kindness
or discordant music
Protect forests and other natural areas, advocate for animals and
Fail to strike down evil, enable the destruction of wilderness,
plants, take and commit to decisive actions
needlessly kill animals
Perform just executions, study local laws, oppose corrupt or
Kill without thought, execute the innocent, mock the condemned,
bloodthirsty government officials
falsely incriminate another
Spread truth, debate contentious issues, aid messengers
Sow or perpetuate lies, obstruct discussion, argue in bad faith
Wear and make beautiful things, train for combat, recover and
return lost mementos
Cultivate gardens, share wine, keep helpful insects, teach others
to farm
Read fortunes, practice calligraphy, devise and study runes
Forgive cowards and offer them guidance, encourage others to test
their mettle, face and learn from your fears
Forgive those who have wronged you, embrace a peaceful mindset,
seek and allow redemption
Help others achieve their desires, aid and protect sex workers, help
others through difficult transitions
Aid travelers, comfort the lonely, teach the constellations

GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

Disrupt or destroy romantic unions, enforce a dress code, cower
from fights
Salt or despoil the earth, spread plague or pestilence, carelessly use
pesticides
Destroy magic scrolls, cheat at games of chance, deliberately write
illegibly
Punish another creature for cowardice, routinely avoid that which
scares you
Cause lethal harm to a creature, deny a repentant creature an
opportunity for redemption, ask a retired warrior to fight
Persecute sex workers, force or support unwanted marriages

4121883

Mock the homesick, deny warmth to others, pollute the skies with
smoke or light
Avenge the wronged, destroy evildoers, lead the charge in battle
Cower from combat, forgive those who have irreparably sinned,
leave allies unwillingly in darkness
Empower local communities, learn from elders, share and teach from Force others to follow your path, inflict negative damage, age others
experiences
or steal life with magic
Study monuments, craft golems and artwork from stone, guard
Defile sacred buildings, knowingly unearth evil monuments, destroy
ancient sites
historical artifacts
Defend lawful borders, scout or patrol for evil, wait to strike until
Abandon your post, tolerate poaching, torment animals
you have the advantage
Sacrifice yourself in pursuit of good, champion noble causes, scar
Joke or laugh about injustice, sacrifice others in your place, indulge
your body
in luxury
Serve leaders of ceremonies, craft ceremonial arms and armor, lead Deride sacred ceremonies, carelessly or lazily perform rituals,
a congregation
destroy ceremonial objects
Teach sustainable fishing, swim in saltwater, fly
Imprison birds or clip their wings, poison coastal waters, overfish,
aid Pazuzu or his minions
Solve logic puzzles, investigate crimes, devise new solutions from
Make judgments without evidence, contaminate evidence, obstruct
research
truths

Divine Skill Divine Font Key Edicts
Medicine

Key Anathema

End all mortal life through disease and poison, cultivate diseased
animals
End all mortal life, exploit those who fear death

Key Anathema
Prevent plagues, bury or burn the dead
Offer anything for free, extend mortal lifespans, grant true salvation
to the doomed or dying

129

19092706

4121884

4121884


NE (LE, NE, CE)

Angel of Desolation

Ambition, destruction, fire, might 1st: burning hands, 3rd: haste, 4th: weapon storm

Greatsword

Trelmarixian

NE (LE, NE, CE)

The Lysogenic Prince

Decay *, dust *, earth, nightmares 1st: grease, 2nd: feast of ashes *, 5th: acid storm *

Spiked gauntlet

MONITOR DEMIGODS
Deity

Alignment

Title

Domains

Cleric Spells

Barzahk

N (NG, N, CN)

The Passage

Death, knowledge, travel, vigil *

1st: longstrider, 2nd: knock, 6th: teleport

Favored Weapon

Imot

N (LN, N, NE)

The Symbol of Doom

Death, destruction, fate, glyph *

1st: ill omen *, 2nd: paranoia, 6th: phantasmal calamity

Kerkamoth

LN (LN, N)

The Waiting Void

Monad

N (LN, N)

The Condition of All

Darkness, decay *, destruction,
1st: penumbral shroud *, 5th: shadow siphon, 6th: disintegrate
void *
Creation, knowledge, truth, void * 1st: unseen servant, 2nd: spectral hand, 4th: gaseous form

Mother Vulture

N (NG, N, NE)

The Flesheater

Change *, death, decay *, nature

1st: soothe, 4th: aerial form, 6th: baleful polymorph

Sickle

Narakaas

N (LN, NG, N)

The Cleansing Sentence

Change *, death, pain, sorrow *

1st: endure *, 2nd: slough skin *, 4th: modify memory

Greataxe

Narriseminek

CN (CG, CN)

Hatchet

LN (LG, LN)

1st: true strike, 4th: gravity well *, 7th: reverse gravity

Mace

Saloc

N (NG, N, NE)

The Minder of Immortals

1st: share lore *, 3rd: hypercognition, 5th: dreaming potential

Guisarme

Valmallos

LN (LG, LN)

The Answering Rite

Delirium *, freedom, knowledge,
perfection
Creation, fate, knowledge,
perfection
Change *, death, freedom,
knowledge
Fate, glyph *, knowledge, magic

1st: mindlink, 4th: confusion, 5th: synesthesia

Otolmens

The Crownless, the Maker
of Kings
The Universal

1st: mage armor, 6th: feeblemind, 7th: contingency

Kukri

Ydajisk

CN (CG, CN, CE)

Mother of Tongues

Change *, glyph *, knowledge,
trickery

1st: message rune *, 2nd: blistering invective (Advanced Player’s
Guide), 4th: glibness

Cleric Spells

Club
Shield boss
Warhammer
Fist

Jaws or greatclub

OTHER GODS

19092707

19092707

Szuriel

Deity

Alignment

Title

Domains

Apsu

LG (LG)

The Waybringer

Dahak

CE (CE)

The Endless Destruction

Erecura

LN (LG, LN, N)

Queen of Dis

Creation, protection, travel,
1st: magic fang, 4th: creation, 6th: dragon form (metallic dragons
wyrmkin *
only)
Destruction, fire, wyrmkin *, zeal 1st: magic fang, 3rd: fireball, 6th: dragon form (chromatic dragons
only)
Fate, secrecy, trickery, truth
1st: anticipate peril *, 2nd: misdirection, 3rd: nondetection

Gendowyn

CN (N, CG, CN, CE)

Lady of the Fangwood

Earth, family, luck, nature

Gyronna

CE (NE, CE)

The Angry Hag

Ambition, nightmares, pain, zeal 1st: ill omen *, 2nd: paranoia, 6th: feeblemind

Dagger

Hanspur

CN (N, CG, CN, CE)

The Water Rat

Death, travel, water, wealth

Trident

Jaidi

NG (LG, NG, N)

The Blessing and Bounty

Family, might, nature, sun

1st: hydraulic push, 2nd: aqueous orb (Advanced Player’s Guide),
4th: solid fog
1st: temporary tool, 2nd: shape wood, 3rd: wall of thorns

Lissala

LE (LN, LE)

The Sihedron Scion

Fate, glyph *, magic, toil†

1st: message rune *, 2nd: secret page, 6th: dominate

Whip

Naderi

N (NG, N, NE)

The Lost Maiden

Death, passion, sorrow *, water

1st: soothe, 4th: crushing despair, 5th: drop dead

Dagger

Thamir

CE (NE, CE)

The Silent Blade

1st: penumbral shroud *, 3rd: invisibility sphere, 6th: mislead

Dagger

Walkena

LE (LN, LE)

The Child-God

Ambition, confidence, trickery,
wealth
Family, freedom, sun, tyranny

1st: burning hands, 3rd: fireball, 4th: wall of fire

Spear

Zyphus

NE (NE, CE)

The Grim Harvestman

Death, sorrow *, souls *, undeath

1st: ill omen *, 2nd: shatter, 6th: phantasmal calamity

Pick

Cleric Spells

1st: summon fey, 2nd: barkskin, 5th: tree stride

Favored Weapon
Jaws or staff
Jaws or whip

4121884

Light mace
Whip

Scythe

OUTER GODS AND GREAT OLD ONES
Deity

Alignment

Title

Domains

Azathoth

CN (CN, CE)

The Primal Chaos

Hastur

CE (NE, CE)

The King in Yellow

Decay *, destruction, nightmares, 1st: ill omen *, 5th: synaptic pulse, 9th: unfathomable song
void *
Glyph *, secrecy, void *, wealth
1st: illusory disguise, 4th: confusion, 5th: hallucination

Nhimbaloth

CE (CE)

The Empty Death

Decay *, nature, undeath, void *

Nyarlathotep

CE (NE, CE)

The Crawling Chaos

Knowledge, magic, nightmares,
trickery

Xhamen-Dor

NE (NE, CE)

Yog-Sothoth

CN (CN, CE)

1st: grim tendrils, 2nd: entangle, 5th: cloudkill

Favored Weapon
Warhammer
Rapier
Flail

The Star Seed

1st: message rune *, 2nd: humanoid form, 3rd: enthrall, 4th:
suggestion, 5th: summon entity, 6th: mislead, 7th: project image,
8th: dream council, 9th: weird
Change *, decay *, dreams, nature 1st: summon plant or fungus, 3rd: wall of thorns, 7th: warp mind

Spear

Lurker at the Threshold

Knowledge, time *, travel, void *

Dagger

1st: fleet step, 5th: black tentacles, 7th: time beacon *

Staff

130

19092707

4121885

4121885

19092708

19092708


* New option presented in this book; † Pathfinder Adventure Path #148

Strength or
Constitution
Constitution or
Wisdom

Divine Ability
Constitution or
Wisdom
Strength or
Intelligence
Constitution or
Wisdom
Intelligence or Wisdom

Athletics

Harm

End all mortal life through war, obliterate faith

Nature

Harm

End all mortal life through wasting consumption and starvation,
violently consume matter and souls

Divine Skill Divine Font Key Edicts
Survival

Heal

Occultism

Harm or heal

Occultism

Harm or heal

Aid travelers and those who return from the dead, tend to roadside
graves, find missing objects or people
Search for omens in the natural world, push the boundaries of
mathematics, study past disasters
Clean cluttered spaces, embrace moments of silence

Occultism

Harm or heal

Ensure balance between opposing forces, mediate disagreements

Constitution or
Wisdom

Survival

Heal

Constitution or
Wisdom
Dexterity or Wisdom

Diplomacy

Heal

Occultism

Harm or heal

Dexterity or
Intelligence
Wisdom or Charisma

Crafting

Heal

Diplomacy

Heal

Intelligence or Wisdom

Arcana

Harm or heal

Intelligence or
Charisma

Society

Harm or heal

Divine Ability

Diplomacy

Heal

Strength or
Constitution
Wisdom or Charisma

Athletics

Harm

Deception

Harm or heal

Dexterity or Charisma

Stealth

Heal

Wisdom or Charisma

Intimidation

Harm

Strength or Dexterity

Athletics

Harm

Strength or
Constitution
Intelligence or Wisdom

Nature

Heal

Arcana

Harm

Constitution or
Charisma
Dexterity or Charisma

Diplomacy

Harm

Thievery

Harm

Strength or Wisdom

Deception

Harm

Dexterity or Constitution

Thievery

Harm

Divine Ability

Key Anathema
Celebrate specific calendar dates over others, avoid travel or change,
freeze time for an object or creature
Withhold your understanding of a portent, prevent the destruction of
things that cannot be saved
Attempt to preserve something indefinitely, perform an act of wanton
and significant destruction
Allow your personal motivations to determine a major decision

Recycle rot and waste into useful creations, eat the flesh of your
Poison insects or scavengers, waste food or good materials, allow
own people, kill without mercy if it benefits your community, help
rot to poison an area, create undead
to raise children
Help others through painful changes, offer harsh punishments to the Torture an unwilling creature, take joy in suffering
penitent, seek and allow redemption
Divine the future, transform the bodies of willing creatures, rebel
Refuse to speak to a keketar, eschew a challenge by turning down a
against organized structures
promotion or an advancement
Relentlessly document and interpret data, correct cosmic errors
Suppress a factual report, ignore facts, misrepresent quantitative
data
Help creatures grow and find purpose, offer second chances to
Manipulate or remove a creature’s emotions with magic, spread
failures, study different perspectives on ethics
nihilism or hopelessness
Complicate magical techniques, refine arcane fundamentals, teach Grant magic to those who cannot use it responsibly, cause a magical
arcane apprentices to treat magic responsibly
disaster, ignore magical misconduct
Create using words, chronicle languages and prevent them from
Ban or discourage a language, explain a secret language or slang to
dying, help language evolve
outsiders, destroy literary works

Divine Skill Divine Font Key Edicts

Wisdom or Charisma

Show mercy to creatures who do not worship Szuriel, choose to
marry or have children
Kill or remove a parasite or tumor, grow food

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

Key Anathema

Seek and destroy evil, travel the world, help others fend for
themselves
Kill metallic dragons, destroy things at your whim

Fail to pursue a foe who has betrayed your mercy, attack a creature
without certainty of wrongdoing
Spare a foe after you have chosen to kill them, forgive a slight

Manipulate dangerous beings and opportunities to your benefit,
thrive in hostile conditions, divine the future
Preserve primal areas, destroy blighted fey and agents of CythV’sug, protect those who placate you with offerings
Expose hypocrisy (real or imagined) in others, make other creatures
miserable, demand bribes to spare creatures from your torments
Learn how to live off the river, guard river travelers from unnatural
hazards, save others from drowning
Encourage hard work that benefits all, ensure the health of crops
and vegetation
Work hard and demand others do so as well, cooperate or avoid
conflict with ophidian creatures
Comfort and encourage lovers, help the suffering escape their
circumstances in life or in death
Seize any opportunity that would benefit you, solve your problems
with violence, hide your true intentions
Uphold Mzali’s laws, tend to Walkena and obey his instructions,
oppose exploitation of the Mwangi Expanse
Set pointless traps, spread nihilism, encourage deadly accidents

Despoil nature, kill a natural plant or animal that has managed to
thrive outside of its intended environment
Parley or make a deal with fiends, forgive those who deceive you,
harm an innocent child
Allow others to slight you without retaliation, seek the approval of
society, forgive those who have wronged you
Impose needless laws or restrictions on others, aid daemons or the
Horsemen
Destroy healthy crops, waste food, refuse to help others in your
community
Disobey a superior, shirk your duties, destroy a book

4121885

Dismiss or mock a creature’s grief, separate lovers, torture a creature
Steal from the poor, beg for help or mercy from a fellow worshipper
of Thamir
Consort or trade with non-Mwangi peoples, defy Walkena’s orders
Spread hope, provide aid to Pharasmins

Divine Skill Divine Font Key Edicts

Key Anathema

Constitution or
Charisma
Intelligence or
Charisma
Constitution or
Wisdom
Dexterity or
Intelligence

Performance

Harm

Gather a court of devotees, create discordant piping or babbling

None

Deception

Harm

None

Nature

Harm

Arcana

Harm

Spread Hastur’s Yellow Sign, hide the true nature of your worship,
promulgate the play The King in Yellow
Create undead, feast upon carnivores that have recently feasted
upon others
Sow discord among allies, misuse positions of authority by steering
events toward apocalyptic ends

Constitution or
Wisdom
Intelligence or
Charisma

Nature

Harm

Occultism

Harm

None
None

Spread fungal growths, subtly infect others with knowledge of
None
Xhamen-Dor
Gather knowledge of gates through space and time, curse or mutate None
unborn children


131

19092708

4121886

4121886


QUEENS OF THE NIGHT
Deity

Alignment

Title

Domains

Cleric Spells

Ardad Lili

LE (LN, LE, NE)

The End of Innocence

1st: charm, 3rd: enthrall, 4th: suggestion

Dagger

Doloras

LE (LE, NE)

Our Lady of Pain

Creation, darkness, passion,
wyrmkin *
Creation, pain, repose *, sorrow *

Favored Weapon

1st: phantom pain, 3rd: earthbind, 5th: synaptic pulse

Kukri

Eisheth

LE (LE)

The Erinyes Queen

1st: true strike, 3rd: fireball, 4th: dimension door

Longbow

Mahathallah

LE (LN, LE, NE)

Dowager of Illusions

Ambition, destruction, might,
zeal
Fate, trickery, truth, undeath

1st: illusory disguise, 2nd: misdirection, 5th: illusory scene

Bola *

SARKORIAN GODS
Deity

Alignment

Title

Domains

Cleric Spells

Alglenweis

CG (NG, CG, CN)

Princess of the Rime

Cold *, creation, might, souls *

1st: agitate *, 4th: creation, 5th: cone of cold

Favored Weapon
War flail

Stag Mother of
the Forest of
Stones

N (LG, LN, LE, NG,
N, NE, CG, CN)

She Who Listens

Family, healing, nature, pain

1st: phantom pain, 2nd: animal form (bull only, appears as stag),
6th: flesh to stone

Ranseur

Sturovenen

LG (LG, LN, NG)

The Dragoneagle

Air, confidence, passion, sun

1st: charm, 5th: cloak of colors, 6th: dragon form

Deity

Alignment

Title

Domains

Cleric Spells

Favored Weapon

Daikitsu

N (LN, NG, N, CN)

Lady of Foxes

Change *, creation, family, nature 1st: pest form, 2nd: humanoid form, 5th: illusory scene

Flail

Fumeiyoshi

NE (LE, NE, CE)

Lord of Envy

Ambition, destruction, earth,
undeath

1st: grim tendrils, 2nd: feast of ashes *, 7th: possession

Naginata *

General Susumu LE (LN, LE)

The Black Daimyo

1st: true strike, 2nd: phantom steed, 3rd: wall of wind

Longbow

Kofusachi

CG (NG, CG)

The Laughing God

Confidence, destruction, might,
zeal
Luck, passion, travel, wealth

1st: soothe, 2nd: hideous laughter, 8th: uncontrollable dance

Staff

Lady Jingxi

NG (NG, N)

The Poet of Dawn and Dusk

1st: sleep, 2nd: mirror image, 5th: chromatic wall

Fighting fan *

Lady Nanbyo

CE (NE, CE)

The Widow of Suffering

Creation, glyph *, knowledge,
repose *
Destruction, fire, plague *, water

1st: burning hands, 5th: control water, 6th: dragon form

Warhammer

Main-gauche

TIAN GODS

19092709

19092709

4121886

Lao Shu Po

NE (LE, N, NE, CE)

Old Rat Woman

Darkness, luck, swarm *, trickery 1st: summon animal (rodents only), 2nd: knock, 3rd: nondetection

Nalinivati

N (LN, NG, N, NE)

The Serpent’s Kiss

Glyph *, magic, passion,
wyrmkin *

Qi Zhong

NG (LG, NG, N, CG) Master of Medicine

Sun Wukong

CN (CG, CN, CE)

The Monkey King

Yaezhing

LE (LE, NE)

Minister of Blood

Healing, knowledge, magic,
protection
Indulgence, might, nature,
trickery
Death, duty *, pain, trickery

Yamatsumi

N (LN, NG, N, CN)

The Mountain Lord

Title

Dagger

1st: charm, 2nd: invisibility, 3rd: lightning bolt, 4th: reflective
scales *, 5th: subconscious suggestion, 6th: mislead, 7th:
contingency, 8th: scintillating pattern, 9th: storm of vengeance
1st: soothe, 2nd: false life, 4th: resilient sphere

Jaws or urumi *

1st: jump, 3rd: mad monkeys (Advanced Player’s Guide), 4th:
creation
1st: true strike, 2nd: invisibility, 6th: mislead

Staff
Shuriken

Cold *, earth, fire, might

1st: shockwave *, 3rd: shifting sand *, 7th: volcanic eruption

Greatclub

Domains

Cleric Spells

Heavy mace

VUDRANI GODS

132

Deity

Alignment

Arundhat

NG (LG, NG, N, CG) The Sacred Perfume

Ashukharma

CN (N, CG, CN)

The Divine Divide

Chamidu

N (NG, N, NE)

The Roar of the Storm

Dhalavei

LE (LE, NE)

The Unsuspected Rot

Diomazul

LE (LN, LE)

The Serpent of Eighty Blades

Lahkgya

CE (CE)

Patron of Monkeys

Likha

N (LN, NG, N, CN)

The Teller

Matravash

LN (LG, LN, N)

The Wide Water

Ragdya

N (LN, NG, N, CN)

The Sage on the Mountain

Raumya

NE (LE, NG, N, NE) The Evil Prince

Healing, magic, nature,
1st: shillelagh, 3rd: ghostly weapon, 4th: speak with plants
protection
Earth, might, protection, repose * 1st: shattering gem *, 4th: shape stone, 5th: wall of stone
Healing, lightning *, nature,
1st: summon animal, 3rd: lightning bolt, 5th: moon frenzy
nightmares
Destruction, knowledge, secrecy, 1st: fear, 4th: glibness, 6th: mislead
trickery
Destruction, earth, water, zeal
1st: phantom pain, 2nd: slough skin *, 4th: weapon storm
Indulgence, nature, swarm *,
trickery
Creation, knowledge, passion,
sorrow *
Cities, nature, travel, water

1st: fleet step, 3rd: mad monkeys (Advanced Player’s Guide), 4th:
confusion
1st: illusory disguise, 3rd: enthrall, 5th: illusory scene
1st: share lore *, 3rd: slow, 4th: speak with plants

Air, confidence, might, perfection 1st: shockwave *, 3rd: mad monkeys (Advanced Player’s Guide),
4th: gaseous form
Confidence, might, knowledge, 1st: true strike, 2nd: invisibility, 4th: weapon storm
wealth


Favored Weapon
Staff
Greatsword
Spear
Temple sword
Scimitar
Jaws or battle axe
Hatchet
Whip
Mace
Trident

19092709

4121887

4121887

19092710

19092710


* New option presented in this book; † Pathfinder Adventure Path #148

Divine Ability
Intelligence or
Charisma
Constitution or
Wisdom
Strength or Dexterity
Wisdom or Charisma

Divine Ability

Divine Skill Divine Font Key Edicts
Diplomacy

Harm

Medicine

Harm

Intimidation

Harm

Deception

Harm

Divine Skill Divine Font Key Edicts

Strength or Wisdom

Nature

Heal

Constitution or
Intelligence

Medicine

Heal

Dexterity or Charisma

Diplomacy

Heal

Divine Ability

Manipulate others with false promises, aid women who have been
unfairly maligned
Push the boundaries of science and suffering, torture other
creatures
Avenge all insults, claim what you desire and deserve, humiliate
your foes in ironic fashion
Become an arbiter of reality, reject conventional wisdom as
falsehood, capitalize on the ignorance of others

Key Anathema
Give someone more than you receive from them, allow yourself to
be swayed by lust
Show or act on emotion, allow a plea for mercy to sway you
Allow a slight to go unanswered, show humility or fear

GODS OF THE
INNER SEA

Key Anathema

DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES

Act with conviction and confidence, be a passionate and responsible Command a subordinate to perform a task you’re not willing to
leader to your people or companions
perform yourself

Key Anathema

Dexterity or
Intelligence

Crafting

Heal

Ensure the health of crops and vegetation, perfect a craft or trade,
leave offerings for foxes, celebrate the turning of the seasons

Mistreat your tools, pass a beggar without giving alms, discriminate
against sex workers or the lower class

Constitution or
Charisma

Intimidation

Harm

Pass by food without stealing a bite, allow honor or tradition to
prevent you from taking what you want

Strength or Dexterity

Athletics

Harm

Dexterity or
Constitution
Intelligence or Wisdom

Performance

Heal

Performance

Heal

Strength or
Constitution
Dexterity or
Intelligence
Wisdom or Charisma

Nature

Harm

Thievery

Harm

Arcana

Harm or heal

Punish those who have good fortune they don’t deserve, devour
the pleasures of the living, encourage resentment, make graveyards
supernaturally unsafe
Seek glory in battle, loudly proclaim your victories, protect your
possessions and strongholds
Support local businesses, bring prosperity to your community,
sample life’s pleasures
Create art with words, master the written language, display the soft
beauty of natural colors
Revel in destruction, make natural disasters worse, allow natural
disasters take their due
Work quietly toward your goals in the shadows, steal what you
need, keep an ear among the ignored and downtrodden
Seek out magic and use it, use poison, heal poisons, bear or adopt
children, raise snakes

Intelligence or Wisdom

Medicine

Heal

Strength or Charisma

Acrobatics

Harm or heal

Dexterity or
Intelligence
Strength or Wisdom

Stealth

Harm

Athletics

Harm or heal

Divine Ability

Nature

Heal

Constitution or
Intelligence
Strength or
Constitution
Strength or Charisma

Crafting

Harm or heal

Medicine

Harm or heal

Deception

Harm or heal

Strength or Dexterity

Athletics

Harm or heal

Dexterity or
Intelligence
Intelligence or
Charisma
Constitution or
Wisdom
Dexterity or Wisdom

Thievery

Harm

Performance

Harm or heal

Survival

Heal

Acrobatics

Heal

Performance

Harm or heal

Strength or Charisma

PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

Cower from fights, refuse a challenge from an equal, mistreat your
weapons, abuse your mount
Become tied to one location, judge another based on sexual desires
or gender roles
Destroy a natural plum tree, drink excessive amounts of alcohol, act
rude or boorish
Allow a natural disaster to completely destroy a community or leave
a group with no survivors
Work honestly for something you could steal instead, risk too much
for another creature
Kill a harmless snake or swan, spurn friends due to jealousy or
romantic competition, betray your offspring, separate lovers

4121887

Teach knowledge to others, relieve suffering despite personal
difficulty, heal sickness and injuries
Live life freely, drink, play pranks

Deal lethal damage to another creature (unless as part of a
necessary medical treatment)
Refuse a reasonable bet or duel, let social pressure change your
behavior
Commit assassinations for hire, strike unseen, carry out punishment Show mercy to a target, take credit for your assassinations, refuse
for convicted criminals
to punish a lawfully convicted criminal
Strive to be self-sufficient, respect nature, test yourself against the Become reliant on civilization, destroy something without creating
elements
or growing something in its place

Divine Skill Divine Font Key Edicts

Intelligence or Wisdom

OVERVIEW

Become too invested in mortal affairs

Strive to perfect an art or craft, protect the monuments of your
Destroy an artistic creation without providing something in its place,
people, stir others into action
refuse to act if called upon
Provide shelter and succor for women and children in need, act as a Harm a pregnant mother or innocent child, including animals
responsible steward of your environment

Divine Skill Divine Font Key Edicts

GODS &
MAGIC

Key Anathema

Practice herbalism, tend to sacred flowers, offer appropriate flowers Dispose of waste near flowers, harvest flowers without offering the
to other divinities
proper prayers, dispose of withered flowers improperly
Hinder travel, create and enforce physical and emotional boundaries, Destroy a natural barrier, pursue a personal relationship after being
build defensive earthworks
refused, betray a lover
Destroy aberrant creatures and fiends, live free of social or materialistic Harm a child, pollute the wilds, refuse to treat an illness
chains, cause destruction when angered
Infiltrate righteous organizations and governments, destroy trust,
Betray a fellow servant of Dhalavei, harm those under Dhalavei’s
perform human sacrifices
protection
Remain celibate and detached from worldly pleasures, meditate,
Provoke a fight, give mercy to anyone who provokes a fight with
utterly destroy your enemies, erase all traces of defeated foes
you
Steal luxuries for yourself, destroy property for fun, demand bribes to
Work honestly for something you could steal instead, kill a monkey
spare creatures from your torments
Tell history to others, sponsor or perform in plays and recitals, adapt
Begin a performance or tale without first inviting the gods to watch,
ancient works into modern language
act out a death on stage
Aid the persecuted, accommodate and facilitate others, practice
Destroy lotus fields, interfere with the flow of the Matra river,
contemplation and restraint
pollute clean water, reveal the location of non-evil fugitives
Seek enlightenment through worldly experience, create humor in
Make a joke out of someone’s suffering, own a slave, discriminate
life, use harmless pranks to teach others
based on social status
Improve yourself with music and literature, take what you want,
Abuse a loyal subject, harm or kill a non-combatant
seek power above others


133

19092710

4121888

4121888


Glossary and Index
This appendix contains brief explanations and page
references for the content presented in this book,
including new rules, locations, deities, organizations,
and so on.
Abaddon A vast wasteland plane that is the source of the river Styx
and home to the fiends known as daemons. The plane is neutral evil.
Absalom Largest city in the Inner Sea region, located on Starstone Isle
and originally founded by Aroden. Lost Omens World Guide 12–23
Absalom Reckoning The most commonly used calendar in Avistan and
Garund. The current year is 4720 ar.
Abyss An endless winding plane full of dangerous chasms and home to
the fiends known as demons. The plane is chaotic evil.
agathion A group of celestials with bestial features, born of the
enlightened souls of good mortals. Agathions are native to Nirvana.
Age of Darkness The age following Earthfall, ranging from –5293 ar
to –4294 ar.
aiudara Powerful gates created by elves to allow travel across great
distances. Also known as elf gates.
alternate domains 7–8
anadi A reclusive people from Garund who resemble spiders and can
assume human forms. Pathfinder Adventure Path #145 84–85
android Humanoids created by artificial means. Most common in Numeria.
Arcadia One of Golarion’s continents, lying west of the Inner Sea region
past the ruins of Azlant. Lost Omens World Guide 6–7
Aroden Lawful neutral god of humanity, innovation, history, culture,
and fulfillment of destiny. Known as the Last Azlanti. Now deceased.
Ascended The title for the deities who achieved their apotheosis by
completing the Test of the Starstone.
Astral Plane A transitive plane through which all souls pass on their
way to their final judgment.
asura Lawful evil extraplanar creatures born from the gods’ mistakes,
who seek to destroy the gods’ creations. They primarily reside in Hell.
asura rana The most powerful asuras, who dwell in desecrated holy
sites and the wilds of Hell.
Avistan One of Golarion’s continents. It makes up the northern half of
the Inner Sea region. Lost Omens World Guide 7
Axis A massive planar city that is known for its adherence to law and
home to the monitors known as aeons. The plane is lawful neutral.
Azlant One of the greatest nations during the Age of Legend. The
empire was destroyed during Earthfall, and its ruins remain as
islands in the Arcadian Ocean. Lost Omens World Guide 8, 62–63
background 9
Bellflower Network A secretive organization dedicated to freeing
halfling slaves, especially in Cheliax.
Bleaching A process brought on by ennui that decolors and ages a
gnome, typically culminating in the gnome’s death.
Boneyard A plane where the souls of the dead travel in the afterlife.
Home to the monitors known as psychopomps. The plane is neutral.
brine dragon A type of primal dragon that live near oceans and seas.
Carcosa An ancient, alien city located in a distant solar system far from
Golarion. Home to the Great Old One Hastur.
Casmaron One of Golarion’s continents. Located immediately east of
the Inner Sea region.
celestial Creatures who hail from or have a strong connection to the
good-aligned planes.
Cernunnos Chaotic good empyreal lord of fertility, seasons, and wild
animals. Known as the Stag Lord. 128–129
Dark Tapestry The name for the dark spaces between the stars.
Believed to be home to beings far beyond the comprehension of
mortals and even gods.
Darklands The immense area of caverns, vaults, and passages beneath
the surface of Golarion. Lost Omens World Guide 7–8
Dead Roads The metaphysical network connecting the Boneyard to the
Material Plane. Used by psychopomps to travel between these planes.
deity A powerful being who exists beyond the scope of mortality,
immortality, and undeath. Deities can grant powers to mortals and,
unlike demigods and quasideities, do not have statistics.
demigod A powerful immortal who can grant powers to mortals.
Demigods are always level 26 or higher.
divine intercession 9
domains 112–119
drow Descendants of ancient elves who live within the Darklands.
Earthfall A cataclysmic event in –5293 ar, in which a rain of meteorites
fell upon Golarion and caused massive destruction.

19092711

19092711

Elysium A plane full of unbound wilderness and home to the celestials
known as azatas. The plane is chaotic good.
Ethereal Plane A transitive plane that overlaps with the planes of the
Inner Sphere. It allows for travel within the Inner Planes.
feats 104–105
fiend Creatures who hail from or have a strong connection to the
evil‑aligned planes.
First World A plane that overlaps the Material Plane and is said to
be a “rough draft” of existence. It is home to vibrant landscapes
and fey.
Garund One of Golarion’s continents. Its northern portion makes up the
southern half of the Inner Sea region.
Geb A nation in eastern Garund that’s a haven for undead. Lost Omens
World Guide 8
god/goddess Any being who can grant domains, spells, and other
abilities: a deity, demigod, or quasideity.
Great Beyond The collective name for all of the planes of existence of
the known multiverse.
Halcamora Neutral good empyreal lord of gardens, orchards, and wine.
Known as the Lady of Ripe Bounty. 128–129
Harrow A method of divination that uses cards known as a harrow
deck to tell fortunes. Especially popular in Varisia.
Heaven A plane that embodies order and compassion and is home to
the celestials known as archons. The plane is lawful good.
Heavenly Bureaucracy The collective term for the deities of Tian Xia.
Also known as the Heavenly Court.
Hell A cruel, constructed plane separated into nine distinct layers and
home to the fiends known as devils. The plane is lawful evil.
Hellknights A set of knightly orders with a strict focus on maintaining
order and upholding the law. Lost Omens Character Guide 76–85
Inner Sea region The collective name for the continent of Avistan and
the northern portion of Garund, surrounding the Inner Sea.
Inner Sphere The center of the Great Beyond. It consists of the Astral
Plane, Elemental Planes, Energy Planes, Ethereal Plane, the First
World, the Material Plane, and the Shadow Plane.
Jaidi Ancient Azlanti goddess of agriculture, hard work, and
self‑sufficiency. Known as the Blessing and Bounty. 130–131
Jalmeray An island nation off the eastern coast of Garund. A home
for immigrants from distant Vudra. Lost Omens World Guide 77–79
Knights of Lastwall The remaining knights of fallen Lastwall, who seek
to destroy the Whispering Tyrant. Lost Omens World Guide 86–95
Kyonin A nation in central Avistan. Known as the center of elven
culture in Avistan. Lost Omens World Guide 127–128
Maelstrom The collective term for the uncharted and chaotic areas on
the metaphysical borders of the planes on the Outer Sphere. Home
to the monitors known as proteans. The plane is chaotic neutral.
magic items 121–123
Magnimar One of the major city-states in Varisia. Known as the City
of Monuments.
Material Plane The plane that encompasses the known universe, including
Golarion and its solar system. Located within the Inner Sphere.
Matra River A vast and important river that runs through central Vudra.
Minkai A large empire located in eastern Tian Xia. Known for its
recently quelled civil instability.
monitor Creatures who hail from or have a strong connection to the
neutrally aligned planes.
Mzali A temple-city located on the southern reaches of the Mwangi
Expanse. Lost Omens World Guide 88–89
Negative Energy Plane A plane located within the center of the Shadow
Plane and filled with destructive energy. Also known as the Void.
Ninshabur A ruined land in central Casmaron. Once a great empire, it
was destroyed by Tarrasque, a Spawn of Rovagug.
Nirvana A peaceful plane filled with idyllic landscapes and home to the
celestials known as agathions. The plane is neutral good.
Outer Sphere The outer portion of the Great Beyond, consisting of nine
planes with a strong link to particular alignments and philosophies
and serve as the homes for many gods: Axis, Abaddon, the Abyss,
the Boneyard, Elysium, Heaven, Hell, the Maelstrom, and Nirvana.
pantheons 92–93
Plane of Air An Elemental Plane filled with vast skies, churning storms,
and massive clouds.
Plane of Earth An Elemental Plane permeated with solid stone, endless
caverns, and rich mineral veins.
Plane of Fire An Elemental Plane covered in dancing flames, seas of
magma, and clouds of ash.
Plane of Water An Elemental Plane saturated with endless oceans,
bogs of mud and silt, and clouds of steam.

4121888

134

19092711

4121889

4121889

19092712

19092712


primordial inevitables The name for the first inevitables, who embody
fundamental concepts of the multiverse.
qlippoth A group of primeval fiends born of the essence of the Abyss.
Qlippoth are native to the Abyss.
qlippoth lord Particularly powerful qlippoth with the power of gods.
quasideity Any being who can grant powers to mortals. A quasideity
can be any type of being and is always level 25 or lower.
Razatlan A nation located in central Arcadia and the seat of what
remains of the former Razatlani Empire.
Red Mantis A group of assassins who serve the mantis god Achaekek
and reside on Mediogalti Island. Lost Omens World Guide 65–66
River Styx A vast river that originates in Abaddon, traverses the Outer
Sphere, and ends at the base of Pharasma’s Spire in the Boneyard.
Sarkoris Scar A region located in northern Avistan. The previous site of
the demonic Worldwound. Lost Omens World Guide 32–33
Shadow Plane A plane located on the far side of the Ethereal Plane that
is a twisted reflection of the Material Plane.
spells 106–111
Starstone A unique gemstone that crashed to Golarion during Earthfall.
It was eventually raised by Aroden and placed within the Starstone
Cathedral in Absalom. Mortals can attempt to ascend to godhood by
reaching the stone and taking the Test of the Starstone.

Open Game License Version 1.0a
The following text is the property of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and is Copyright 2000 Wizards of the
Coast, Inc. (“Wizards”). All Rights Reserved.
1. Definitions: (a) “Contributors” means the copyright and/or trademark owners who have contributed Open
Game Content; (b) “Derivative Material” means copyrighted material including derivative works and translations
(including into other computer languages), potation, modification, correction, addition, extension, upgrade,
improvement, compilation, abridgment or other form in which an existing work may be recast, transformed or
adapted; (c) “Distribute” means to reproduce, license, rent, lease, sell, broadcast, publicly display, transmit or
otherwise distribute; (d) “Open Game Content” means the game mechanic and includes the methods, procedures,
processes and routines to the extent such content does not embody the Product Identity and is an enhancement
over the prior art and any additional content clearly identified as Open Game Content by the Contributor, and
means any work covered by this License, including translations and derivative works under copyright law,
but specifically excludes Product Identity. (e) “Product Identity” means product and product line names, logos
and identifying marks including trade dress; artifacts, creatures, characters, stories, storylines, plots, thematic
elements, dialogue, incidents, language, artwork, symbols, designs, depictions, likenesses, formats, poses,
concepts, themes and graphic, photographic and other visual or audio representations; names and descriptions
of characters, spells, enchantments, personalities, teams, personas, likenesses and special abilities; places,
locations, environments, creatures, equipment, magical or supernatural abilities or effects, logos, symbols, or
graphic designs; and any other trademark or registered trademark clearly identified as Product identity by the
owner of the Product Identity, and which specifically excludes the Open Game Content; (f) “Trademark” means
the logos, names, mark, sign, motto, designs that are used by a Contributor to identify itself or its products or
the associated products contributed to the Open Game License by the Contributor (g) “Use”, “Used” or “Using”
means to use, Distribute, copy, edit, format, modify, translate and otherwise create Derivative Material of Open
Game Content. (h) “You” or “Your” means the licensee in terms of this agreement.
2. The License: This License applies to any Open Game Content that contains a notice indicating that
the Open Game Content may only be Used under and in terms of this License. You must affix such a notice
to any Open Game Content that you Use. No terms may be added to or subtracted from this License
except as described by the License itself. No other terms or conditions may be applied to any Open Game
Content distributed using this License.
3. Offer and Acceptance: By Using the Open Game Content You indicate Your acceptance of the terms
of this License.
4. Grant and Consideration: In consideration for agreeing to use this License, the Contributors grant
You a perpetual, worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive license with the exact terms of this License to
Use, the Open Game Content.
5. Representation of Authority to Contribute: If You are contributing original material as Open Game
Content, You represent that Your Contributions are Your original creation and/or You have sufficient rights
to grant the rights conveyed by this License.
6. Notice of License Copyright: You must update the COPYRIGHT NOTICE portion of this License to
include the exact text of the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any Open Game Content You are copying, modifying
or distributing, and You must add the title, the copyright date, and the copyright holder’s name to the
COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any original Open Game Content you Distribute.
7. Use of Product Identity: You agree not to Use any Product Identity, including as an indication as to
compatibility, except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of each
element of that Product Identity. You agree not to indicate compatibility or co-adaptability with any
Trademark or Registered Trademark in conjunction with a work containing Open Game Content except as
expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of such Trademark or Registered
Trademark. The use of any Product Identity in Open Game Content does not constitute a challenge to the
ownership of that Product Identity. The owner of any Product Identity used in Open Game Content shall
retain all rights, title and interest in and to that Product Identity.
8. Identification: If you distribute Open Game Content You must clearly indicate which portions of the
work that you are distributing are Open Game Content.
9. Updating the License: Wizards or its designated Agents may publish updated versions of this License.
You may use any authorized version of this License to copy, modify and distribute any Open Game Content
originally distributed under any version of this License.
10. Copy of this License: You MUST include a copy of this License with every copy of the Open Game
Content You distribute.
11. Use of Contributor Credits: You may not market or advertise the Open Game Content using the name
of any Contributor unless You have written permission from the Contributor to do so.
12. Inability to Comply: If it is impossible for You to comply with any of the terms of this License with
respect to some or all of the Open Game Content due to statute, judicial order, or governmental regulation
then You may not Use any Open Game Material so affected.
13. Termination: This License will terminate automatically if You fail to comply with all terms herein and
fail to cure such breach within 30 days of becoming aware of the breach. All sublicenses shall survive
the termination of this License.
14. Reformation: If any provision of this License is held to be unenforceable, such provision shall be
reformed only to the extent necessary to make it enforceable.
15. COPYRIGHT NOTICE
Open Game License v 1.0a © 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc.
System Reference Document © 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc.; Authors: Jonathan Tweet, Monte Cook,
and Skip Williams, based on material by E. Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson.
Genie, Marid from the Tome of Horrors Complete © 2011, Necromancer Games, Inc., published and
distributed by Frog God Games; Author: Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary Gygax.
Pathfinder Lost Omens Gods & Magic (Second Edition) © 2020, Paizo Inc.; Authors: Robert Adducci, Amirali
Attar Olyaee, Calder CaDavid, James Case, Adam Daigle, Katina Davis, Leo Glass, Joshua Grinlinton, James
Jacobs, Virginia Jordan, Jason Keeley, Jacky Leung, Lyz Liddell, Ron Lundeen, Stephanie Lundeen, Jacob W.
Michaels, Matt Morris, Dave Nelson, Samantha Phelan, Jennifer Povey, Jessica Redekop, Nathan Reinecke,
Patrick Renie, David N. Ross, Simone D. Sallé, Michael Sayre, David Schwartz, Shahreena Shahrani, Isabelle
Thorne, Marc Thuot, Jason Tondro, and Diego Valdez.

svirfneblin An offshoot of gnomes who live in underground realms.
Also known as deep gnomes.
Taldor A nation located in southeast Avistan. This empire in decline
seeks to reclaim former glory. Lost Omens World Guide 128–129
theme templates 9
Tian Xia One of Golarion’s continents. Located far to the east of the
Inner Sea region, past Casmaron. Lost Omens World Guide 9
Ustalav A nation located in northern central Avistan. Countless terrors
roam the region. Lost Omens World Guide 45
Varisia A region in northwestern Avistan. Known as a frontier land and
home to ancient Thassilonian ruins. Lost Omens World Guide 116–117
velstrac Cruel beings who are obsessed with self-perfection and thrive
on fear and pain. Velstracs are native to the Shadow Plane.
Vudra A vast peninsula in southeastern Casmaron. It is home of the
Vudrani people.
weapons 120–121
Worldwound An enormous rift that opened in the nation of Sarkoris,
allowing the demonic hordes of the Abyss to spill forth and destroy
the region. It has since been closed, and the demon-blighted land
is now known as the Sarkoris Scar. Lost Omens World Guide 26, 32
xiomorn Creatures from the Plane of Earth who travel to planets to
experiment on native residents. Also known as Vault Keepers.

PAIZO INC.

Creative Directors • James Jacobs, Robert G. McCreary, and Sarah E. Robinson
Director of Game Design • Jason Bulmahn
Managing Developers • Adam Daigle and Amanda Hamon
Organized Play Lead Developer • Linda Zayas-Palmer
Developers • Eleanor Ferron, Jason Keeley, Luis Loza, Ron Lundeen, Patrick Renie,
Michael Sayre, and Jason Tondro
Starfinder Lead Designer • Joe Pasini
Starfinder Senior Developer • John Compton
Starfinder Society Developer • Thurston Hillman
Designers • Logan Bonner, Lyz Liddell, and Mark Seifter
Managing Editor • Judy Bauer
Editors • James Case, Leo Glass, Avi Kool, Adrian Ng, and Lu Pellazar
Art Director • Sonja Morris
Senior Graphic Designers • Emily Crowell and Adam Vick
Production Artist • Tony Barnett
Franchise Manager • Mark Moreland
Project Manager • Gabriel Waluconis

GODS &
MAGIC
OVERVIEW
GODS OF THE
INNER SEA
DEMIGODS
AND OTHER
DIVINITIES
PHILOSOPHIES
AND
SPIRITUALITY
CHARACTER
OPTIONS
APPENDIX
INDEX AND
GLOSSARY

Paizo CEO • Lisa Stevens
Chief Creative Officer • Erik Mona
Chief Financial Officer • John Parrish
Chief Operations Officer • Jeffrey Alvarez
Chief Technical Officer • Vic Wertz

4121889

Director of Sales • Pierce Watters
Sales Associate • Cosmo Eisele
Vice President of Marketing & Licensing • Jim Butler
Licensing Manager • Glenn Elliott
Public Relations Manager • Aaron Shanks
Social Media Producer • Payton Smith
Customer Service & Community Manager • Sara Marie
Operations Manager • Will Chase
Organized Play Manager • Tonya Woldridge
Human Resources Generalist • Angi Hodgson
Accountant • William Jorenby
Data Entry Clerk • B. Scott Keim
Director of Technology • Raimi Kong
Senior Software Developer • Gary Teter
Webstore Coordinator • Katina Davis
Customer Service Team • Joan Hong, Virginia Jordan, Samantha Phelan, and
Diego Valdez
Warehouse Team • Laura Wilkes Carey, Mika Hawkins, Heather Payne, Jeff Strand,
and Kevin Underwood
Website Team • Brian Bauman, Robert Brandenburg, Whitney Chatterjee, Erik Keith,
Josh Thornton, and Andrew White

This product is compliant with the Open Game License (OGL) and is suitable for use with the
Pathfinder Roleplaying Game (Second Edition).
Product Identity: The following items are hereby identified as Product Identity, as defined in the
Open Game License version 1.0a, Section 1(e), and are not Open Game Content: All trademarks,
registered trademarks, proper nouns (characters, deities, locations, etc., as well as all adjectives,
names, titles, and descriptive terms derived from proper nouns), artworks, characters, dialogue,
locations, organizations, plots, storylines, and trade dress. (Elements that have previously been
designated as Open Game Content, or are exclusively derived from previous Open Game Content, or
that are in the public domain are not included in this declaration.)
Open Game Content: Except for material designated as Product Identity, the game mechanics of
this Paizo game product are Open Game Content, as defined in the Open Game License version 1.0a,
Section 1(d). No portion of this work other than the material designated as Open Game Content may
be reproduced in any form without written permission.
Pathfinder Lost Omens Gods & Magic (Second Edition) © 2020, Paizo Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Paizo, the Paizo golem logo, Pathfinder, the Pathfinder logo, Pathfinder Society, Starfinder, and
the Starfinder logo are registered trademarks of Paizo Inc.; the Pathfinder P logo, Pathfinder
Accessories, Pathfinder Adventure Card Game, Pathfinder Adventure Card Society, Pathfinder
Adventure Path, Pathfinder Adventures, Pathfinder Battles, Pathfinder Cards, Pathfinder Combat
Pad, Pathfinder Flip-Mat, Pathfinder Flip-Tiles, Pathfinder Legends, Pathfinder Pawns, Pathfinder
Roleplaying Game, Pathfinder World Guide, Starfinder Adventure Path, Starfinder Combat Pad,
Starfinder Flip-Mat, Starfinder Pawns, Starfinder Roleplaying Game, and Starfinder Society are
trademarks of Paizo Inc.
Printed in China.

135

19092712

4121890

4121890


Second Edition

19092713

19092713

4121890

Lost Omens
World Guide
THIS COMPREHENSIVE HARDCOVER OVERVIEW OF THE WORLD OF PATHFINDER PROVIDES EVERYTHING YOU NEED TO KNOW
FOR A LIFETIME OF ADVENTURE IN THE AGE OF LOST OMENS. THE GOD OF HUMANITY IS DEAD AND PROPHECY IS BROKEN,
LEAVING HEROES JUST LIKE YOU TO CARVE THEIR OWN DESTINIES OUT OF AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE!

HARDCOVER $36.99
© 2019, Paizo Inc. Paizo, the Paizo golem logo, Pathfinder, and the Pathfinder logo are registered trademarks of Paizo Inc.;
the Pathfinder P logo, Pathfinder Adventure Path, Pathfinder Roleplaying Game, and Pathfinder World Guide are trademarks of Paizo Inc.


paizo.com/pathfinder

19092713

Gods & Magic

Second Edition

Test Your Convictions

In a land without fate and a world too often void of justice, it falls to the gods
to make or break the people who call upon them for salvation—or draw their
ire. Swear yourself to the might of the gods and the power of their causes, or
reject their offerings to live a life that’s yours and yours alone!

LOST OMENS GODS & MAGIC

Lost Omens Gods & Magic offers details on major gods found in the Inner Sea
region, including what forms their pleasure or wrath might take. It also presents
rules for over a hundred other deities and philosophies so you can find the cause
that best fits your convictions and take up weapons and magic in its service!

LOST OMENS

Gods & Magic
paizo.com/pathfinder

Printed in China.

PZO9303

