4121754

4121754


Rulebook

Second Edition

Make Your Game Your Own!

Gamemastery Guide

As the Game Master of a Pathfinder campaign, you’re the architect of your
players’ adventures—a rewarding but sometimes challenging responsibility.
With this book, your job just got a whole lot easier! Whether you’re building
your own monsters and adventures, looking for new subsystems to play out
cinematic chases or tense infiltrations, or simply want to speed up your game
with scores of NPCs ready for action, the Gamemastery Guide has you covered!

18833808

4121754

Gamemastery
Guide
Logan Bonner and Mark Seifter
paizo.com/pathfinder
Printed in China.

PZO2103
18833808


18833808

4121755

4121755


Gamemastery Guide

18833809

18833809

4121755


18833809

4121756

4121756

18833810

18833810


Table of Contents

AUTHORS
Logan Bonner and Mark Seifter
ADDITIONAL WRITING
Alexander Augunas, Jesse Benner,
John Bennett, Clinton J. Boomer,
Jason Bulmahn, James Case, Paris Crenshaw,
Jesse Decker, Robert N. Emerson, Eleanor Ferron,
Jaym Gates, Matthew Goetz, T.H. Gulliver,
Kev Hamilton, Sasha Laranoa Harving,
BJ Hensley, Vanessa Hoskins, Brian R. James,
Jason LeMaitre, Lyz Liddell, Luis Loza,
Colm Lundberg, Ron Lundeen,
Stephen Radney-MacFarland, Jessica Redekop,
Alistair Rigg, Owen K.C. Stephens,
Amber Stewart, Christina Stiles, Landon Winkler,
and Linda Zayas-Palmer
DESIGNERS
Jason Bulmahn, Lyz Liddell, and
Stephen Radney-MacFarland
ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Luis Loza
EDITING LEAD
Leo Glass
EDITORS
Judy Bauer, James Case, Leo Glass, Avi Kool,
Lyz Liddell, Adrian Ng, and Lu Pellazar
COVER ARTIST
Wayne Reynolds
INTERIOR ARTISTS
Klaher Baklaher, Giorgio Baroni, Diana Campos,
Emile Denis, Michele Esposito, Cynthia F.G.,
Giorgio Falconi, Michele Giorgi, Igor Grechanyi,
Hai Hoang, Oksana Kerro, Ksenia Kozhevnikova,
William Liu, Raph Lomotan, Diana Martinez,
Will O’Brien, Mary Jane Pajaron,
Mikhail Palamarchuk, Maichol Quinto,
Stephen Radney-MacFarland, Kiki Moch Rizky,
Firat Solhan, and Anthony Star
ART DIRECTION AND GRAPHIC DESIGN
Sonja Morris and Sarah E. Robinson
CREATIVE DIRECTOR
James Jacobs
DIRECTOR OF GAME DESIGN
Jason Bulmahn
PROJECT MANAGER
Gabriel Waluconis

6

Introduction
1 Gamemastery Basics
Introduction
Running Encounters
Running Exploration
Running Downtime
Adjudicating Rules
Resolving Problems
Narrative Collaboration

7
10
17
22
28
30
32

Special Circumstances
Rarity in Your Game
Campaign Structure
Adventure Design
Encounter Design
Drawing Maps

55
56
74
82
86
88
90
94

Artifacts
Gems and Art Objects
Afflictions
Building Worlds
Nations
Settlements
Planes

2 Tools
Introduction
Building Creatures
Building Hazards
Building Items
Item Quirks
Intelligent Items
Cursed Items
Relics

PUBLISHER
Erik Mona

54

Paizo Inc.
7120 185th Ave NE, Ste 120
Redmond, WA 98052-0577

4121756

33
35
36
40
46
52

54

3 Subsystems
Introduction
Victory Points
Influence
Research
Chases
Infiltration

4
6

106
114
116
122
130
132
136

146
147
148
151
154
156
160

Reputation
Duels
Leadership
Hexploration
Vehicles

164
166
168
170
174

paizo.com


18833810

4121757

4121757

18833811

18833811


Gamemastery Guide

146

180

4 Variant Rules
Introduction
Ability Score Variants
Alignment Variants
Deep Backgrounds
Feats and Features

181
182
184
186
192

180
Level 0 Characters
Magic Item Variants
Proficiency without Level
Skill Points
Stamina

5 NPC Gallery
Introduction
Courtiers
Criminals
Devotees
Downtrodden
Explorers
Foresters
Healers
Laborers
Magistrates
Mercenaries
Mystics
Officers
Performers

202

4121757

195
196
198
199
200

202
203
206
208
212
214
216
218
220
222
224
226
228
232
236

Publicans
Scholars
Seafarers
Tradespeople
Villains

Glossary and Index

238
240
242
244
246

250


18833811

4121758

4121758


Gamemastery Guide

18833812

18833812

4121758

INTRODUCTION

The focus of every Pathfinder game is the players—their characters are the stars of the
show and appear in every scene that plays out in game. But what about those scenes?
What stories are being told? What old legends are being discovered, and what new ones
are being forged? Who are the villains, the allies, the traitors, the lovers, the monsters, and
the gods? Who runs the world? When you’re the Game Master, that’s all up to you!

THE GAME MASTER

In a game of Pathfinder, the Game Master (often
abbreviated GM) is the player in charge of the story
and the world the other players are exploring with
their characters. As the GM, you set the stage for the
adventure, show how the rest of the world responds
to the player characters’ actions, and guide the action
along an engaging storyline. It falls to you to describe
the characters’ surroundings, the threats facing them,
and the creatures they interact with. You’re presenting
the challenges the heroes must overcome, whether that’s
a deadly trap of haunted blades in a lost tomb full of
ancient treasures or a vicious troll threatening the
heroes’ home village. It also comes to you to interpret
and adjudicate the rules. Game Mastering involves many
more components than playing a character, but it’s a fun
and tremendously rewarding experience.

Though the word “master” is in the GM’s title, it’s not
a role that requires or even benefits from absolutism.
Pathfinder is a collaborative experience, and while your
role as the Game Master is one of an adjudicator or a
moderator, it doesn’t mean you control everything at the
table—especially not the players and their characters.
Nor does the role require mastery, either of the rules
or the setting. You’ll need to understand the game, but
you don’t need to have every rule memorized. When
everyone shares the goal of having fun and telling a
story together, the details will fall into place.

HOW TO USE THIS BOOK

The Gamemastery Guide is one of the central rule books
for Pathfinder. It’s not required to play the game, but it
builds upon the basic guidelines provided in the Game
Mastering chapter of the Pathfinder Core Rulebook,

4

18833812

4121759

4121759

18833813

18833813


Introduction

and you’ll find it helpful to read that chapter before
delving into this book. This book provides more detail
on those topics, as well as many more tools to help you
make your game a fun and memorable experience for
everyone involved.
Throughout most of this book, “you” refers to the
Game Master. In some sections of player-facing material,
however, such as some player-focused variant rules and
the actions for certain subsystems, “you” instead refers
to the player using that material.
Pathfinder as a game is all about customization, and
this book provides you as the Game Master ways to
customize your game just as a player customizes their
character. The toolbox nature of the Gamemastery Guide
makes it easy to take and use whatever components you
need for the game
you’re
running
at any time. As
with any toolbox,
you won’t need to use
everything at once!

CHOOSING
YOUR
TOOLS

The tools of this book
you’ll use most depend
on what kind of Game Master you are, what your players
want, and the story you’re telling together.
No two Game Masters are the same. Perhaps you’re
a veteran Game Master who’s looking for new ways to
customize the game and tailor it to suit your interests
and those of your players. Or perhaps you’re a brand
new GM and looking for guidance to feel comfortable
leading a game of your own. Maybe you’ve been a Game
Master for years, but this is your first time running a
Pathfinder game. No matter where you are as a Game
Master, this book is a valuable tool that can help you
tell the stories you want to tell with your players.
If you’re a newer Game Master, you’ll find a wealth
of information to help you feel confident in running
your games. Chapter 1 in particular can help you better
understand how to run a game in the different modes of
play, how to adjudicate the rules quickly and fairly, and
what to do when special circumstances or problems crop
up at your table. This chapter also contains advice on
using and determining rarity in your game, working with
your players to create a collaborative story, and adapting
your game to meet the needs of the players at your table.
You’ll also find the NPC Gallery in Chapter 5 useful as a
source of stock NPCs to play a role in your game and also
for examples to compare against when using the rules in
Chapter 2 to build your own monsters and NPCs.
If you’re a Game Master running a published
Pathfinder adventure, you’ll find guidance in Chapter 1
specifically for running published adventures, and much

of the advice in that chapter about running a game applies
to published adventures. A number of adventures—
especially scenarios in the Pathfinder Society Organized
Play campaign and Pathfinder Adventure Path volumes—
use the subsystems in Chapter 3. The Victory Points
subsystem is the most fundamental of these, but many
adventures also use the other subsystems found here,
such as vehicles, chases, and influence.
If you are looking to create your own Pathfinder
adventures, Chapter 1 provides you design guidance
ranging from the broad strokes of an entire campaign,
to individual adventures, and then to the particular
considerations of any given encounter. Chapter 2 is a
veritable toolbox you can use to build the creatures,
hazards, items, and other elements you want to use in
your adventures. If you plan to set
your adventures in a world of your
own design, the world-building
section of Chapter 2 can guide that
process and help you establish the
details you’ll need to ensure your
setting is a vibrant backdrop for
fantastic adventure. The NPC
Gallery in Chapter 5
can help populate
your story and
world so that
you don’t have
to create every
element from scratch.
If you’re an experienced Game Master, you will find
a wealth of customization options to tailor your games
to the needs of players. The advice in Chapter 1, such as
the guidance to make encounters more dynamic, can help
you fine-tune your GM skills and enrich your game. Using
the tools in Chapter 2, you’ll be able to build precisely the
option you need for any game. Chapter 3 offers a variety
of rules subsystems that provide a framework for specific
endeavors and situations, from chases and duels to social
influence and overland exploration. In Chapter 4, you’ll
find variant rules options that let you tweak specific
elements of the game, from backgrounds to the entire
mathematical underpinning of the game, to suit your
preferences or the needs of a particular setting or story.

introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121759

REMEMBER THE FIRST RULE
The first rule of Pathfinder is that this game is yours. The
rest of the rules exist for you to use to tell the stories
you want to tell and share exciting adventures with your
friends. There are plenty of rules in this book, but none
of them overrule that first rule. Take the rules that help
you make the game you want, change those that don’t
do quite what you need them to, and leave the ones that
aren’t helping. It’s your game. There’s no right or wrong
way to GM so long as everyone is having fun—and that
includes you!

5

18833813

4121760

4121760


Gamemastery Guide

18833814

18833814

4121760

6

18833814

4121761

4121761

18833815

18833815


Gamemastery Basics

CHAPTER 1: GAMEMASTERY BASICS

The role of a GM can be complex, challenging, and sometimes difficult, but ultimately
rewarding. Luckily, you’re not on your own! Not only will the other players at your game
table help you tell collaborative stories, but you can use the advice here to make your
games run more smoothly and feel more exciting.

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools

The information presented here provides helpful guidance
on how to be a dynamic and engaging GM, and supplements
the GM advice found in Chapter 10 of the Core Rulebook.
Some sections either refer back to that chapter or repeat
some of that information for convenience. This chapter
begins with general advice, then covers the following topics.
• Running Encounters (page 10) is the first of three
sections that explains the three modes of play in more
detail. You’ll find help on tracking initiative, improving
the speed of play, running special battles, and more.
• Running Exploration (page 17) gives details on making
exploration activities more interesting, creating an
evocative environment, lost PCs, and more.
• Running Downtime (page 22) covers ways the PCs
can set goals, explains how to make good downtime
events, provides sample downtime tasks, and more.
• Adjudicating Rules (page 28) offers guidance on how
to make effective rules calls and create house rules.
• Resolving Problems (page 30) presents advice on total
party kills, problem players, and power imbalances.
• Narrative Collaboration (page 32) includes tools for
players to control the story more directly.
• Special Circumstances (page 33) discusses organized
play, odd-sized groups, and players with different needs.
• Rarity in Your Game (page 35) details how rarity can
enrich the theme and story of your game.
• Campaign Structure (page 36) clarifies what makes a
good campaign and describes how to determine its
scope and make enemies and treasure more compelling.
• Adventure Design (page 40) includes tools for building
your own adventures.
• Encounter Design (page 46) explains how to build
entertaining encounters and navigate the challenges
that can arise when designing complex encounters.
• Drawing Maps (page 52) describes useful steps for
making maps and commonly used map symbols.

GENERAL ADVICE

This section covers topics related to running the game.
If you want to know how to build specific types of new
content, this information can be found throughout Chapter
2 in sections such as Building Creatures (page 56), Building
Worlds (page 122), and Settlements (page 132).
Both the Core Rulebook and this book explore many
topics, but don’t feel like you have to master them all to be
a good GM! It’s important to remember you’re not perfect,
and the other players won’t expect you to be. Trial and error,
mistakes and triumphs—they’re all part of running any game.

SESSION ZERO
Some groups prefer to have everyone create their characters
in advance and show up ready to play. However, getting
the group together to make characters can be fun, and can
benefit your game down the line. A session for building
characters is commonly called “session zero.” Session
zero is typically shorter than other game sessions, so you
might plan a short introductory scene for after everyone’s
finished building their characters, or just hang out and do
something else after you’ve planned your characters.
Having a session zero lets players share character
details, making it easier for their characters to have links
and relationships with one another before the adventure
starts, and gives players the chance to become invested
in each other’s characters by organically learning what
decisions other players made. These sessions also give
veterans the chance to help less experienced players through
character creation. Lastly, session zero can give you a
better understanding of the characters and help the players
integrate them into the adventure in interesting ways.

Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121761

PACING GAME SESSIONS
Page 489 of the Core Rulebook explains how to structure,
start, and run a game session. This is all part of pacing your
game. Most sessions should have lulls in the action punctuated
by challenges such as intense encounters, puzzle-based
exploration, and investigation. Presenting players with a
variety of such obstacles can help them feel more engaged at
the table. Information flow matters, too. If the group meets
a large number of NPCs in short order, that can make it
harder for them to remember individuals. It helps to break
things up into smaller scenes and memorable moments.
Knowing when to end a session takes practice. About
20 minutes before a play session is scheduled to conclude,
it can be beneficial to figure out how you’d like to end. It
can be memorable to end with a cliffhanger—a moment so
curious and abrupt it raises questions about what happens
next. Examples include ending play before combat, when
the PCs find vital information, or as they discover treasure.
Doing so can inspire the PCs to discuss the game between
sessions. Note anything that could be satisfying to resolve
over media, such as email. This could include divvying up
treasure, leveling up, or completing downtime tasks.

STAKES AND CONSEQUENCES
A GM should always convey a clear picture of the stakes
and consequences of the PCs’ actions or inaction. What
horrible things will happen if the PCs fail? What can they

7

18833815

4121762

4121762


Gamemastery Guide

achieve if they go beyond what’s expected of them? A
well-constructed adventure conveys the stakes at the outset,
but it’s also important to remind the players of those stakes
throughout play. The Core Rulebook summarizes the scale
of the stakes for each mode of play, and these are varied on
purpose. A game where the stakes are extremely high all
the time cuts out the opportunity for low-key scenes, and
can be overwhelming or even monotonous. In most games,
players enjoy having some scenes where their characters
can relax and socialize with low stakes as well.
Consequences should be specific and evocative. Don’t
just tell the players what happened after their characters’
success or failure; let their characters witness it in the
world. Are they greeted as heroes by townsfolk? Does the
bastion of evil crack and shudder, falling apart as the PCs
escape? Does a failure lead to the death of an ally and a
somber funeral? It’s usually best if the PCs can foresee
the consequences, at least in a general sense. If a villain
demonstrates their intention to conquer a city, and the PCs
don’t stop them, then the city gets conquered. It’s OK if you
have an idea for an interesting subversion occasionally, but
keep those to a minimum or the chain of cause and effect
will become too muddy.
You can emphasize consequences by awarding PCs
accomplishment XP (Core Rulebook 507). It serves as a
good reminder to the players, reinforcing their success.

Failing Forward

18833816

18833816

An unexpected failure can bring the game to a halt,
particularly during exploration. “Failing forward” means
finding a way to progress the story instead of just saying,
“That didn’t work.” This doesn’t mean that the group can’t
fail, or that the PCs should get what they wanted despite
failing. Rather, it means that a failure might still impart
more information, reveal a way to improve their chances
next time, or even cause unforeseen difficulties. Doing so
means the player’s choice to attempt a check mattered, even
if the results weren’t what they wanted. Allowing the PCs
to fail forward means fewer dead ends and perfunctory
checks. It’s important however, not to put unnecessary
pressure on yourself to do so all the time. Sometimes you
won’t know immediately how a PC can fail forward, and
in those cases, it’s usually best to just move on.

IMPROVISATION
As a GM, you often make things up on the fly. You can find
tips for improvising rules on page 491 of the Core Rulebook
and within the Adjudicating Rules section of this book
(pages 28–29). When an issue seems to pertains to the story
instead of the rules, ask yourself the following questions.
• Does something already established in our story so far
tell me what should happen here?
• If an NPC is involved, what would their personality
lead them to do?
• What does the player expect to happen?
• What would best fit the themes of our story?

You might not have a good answer for every question,
but asking them can inspire useful solutions. If what you
need to invent is significant in the storyline or world, there’s
nothing wrong with asking the group to take a little break
while you fill in the gap. If it’s not particularly significant
and you can’t come up with anything more compelling, it’s
also okay to say, “Nothing happens,” and move on.
Often, a player will ask, “What happens when I do
that?” This is a good indicator that the player expects
that what they’ve done will draw a reaction from an NPC
or the environment. Unless the player is way off base,
provide an in-game response, even if it’s minor. The player
has telegraphed what matters to them, and the perceived
importance of their action can draw them into the game.

False Information
A critical failure to Recall Knowledge can result in you
needing to convey false information, requiring some
improvisation. If you aren’t careful, this information can
be perceived by the PCs as too silly, or could derail the
game. For example, if a PC misinterpreted text about the
god of commerce, Abadar, saying they believe the god is
an incompetent chaotic spendthrift who’s bad with money
is absurd. Similarly, if they incorrectly believe Abadar will
reward them with great wealth if they ring bells in four
different temple corners, this could send them on a tangent.
Providing false information can cause the PCs to
make mistakes, but the consequences should typically
be immediate rather than continual or far in the future.
Avoid dispensing false information that might not be used
for hours or entire sessions, after the check is forgotten.
If you’re unsure, the safest form of false information is
information that’s wrong but not in a way that causes
major consequences. Remember that a critical failure says
you get incorrect information, not that you get importantseeming false information. Erroneously believing Abadar’s
symbol is a set of scales instead of a key might lead to a
miscommunication, but one that’s not dangerous, pretty
easy to clear up, and only a little embarrassing for the PC.

4121762

SECRET CHECKS
During play, you roll some checks in secret instead of
allowing the player to do so, as explained on page 450 of
the Core Rulebook. This rule helps ensure that a player
remains uncertain at times when their character is unsure
of how a situation may resolve, immersing the player in
their character’s perspective. It can be handy to keep a
list of the PCs’ modifiers on hand to help you roll secret
checks more quickly. At least, you should record each
player’s Perception modifier, their saving throw modifiers
(especially Will), and the skill modifiers of any skills they
often use to Recall Knowledge. Check in anytime the PCs
level up, and consider asking the players to update you
when any of these modifiers change.
You can still have the players roll the checks even if an
action has the secret trait. This is usually best done when

8

18833816

4121763

4121763

18833817

18833817


Gamemastery Basics

the results are going to be immediate or when stakes are
low, like when the PC is trying to recall something during
downtime that they’ll see is false through the course of their
research. You can instead have the players handle all their
rolls, secret or otherwise. This works best when the group
is interested in leaning into the dramatic irony of knowing
a PC is wrong and playing up their characters’ mistakes.

HERO POINTS
Page 507 of the Core Rulebook offers guidelines for
determining how many Hero Points to award and when
to do so. These recommendations are flexible. Consider
Hero Points a way to reinforce your personal style of Game
Mastering and to reward what you value during play. The
toughest part of awarding Hero Points can be remembering
to do it! Keeping a Hero Point token on hand in front of
you can provide a visual and tactile reminder. You can also
solicit help from your players by asking them to remind you
when they think a PC’s action merits a Hero Point.

METAGAMING
Knowledge the players have that their characters don’t is
called “metagame knowledge,” and using it to influence
characters’ decisions is called “metagaming.” Some
metagaming results naturally from play and is wise to
disregard. The wizard aiming a fireball precisely enough to
include three enemies in the very edge of the spell’s area is
probably unrealistic, but isn’t that disruptive to play. Things
get more questionable if the player says,“That’s a rakshasa, so
don’t use divine spells against it,” regardless of whether their
character has encountered a rakshasa before or identified
the creature. Each group is different, and the assumption
of what the characters know varies. If metagaming starts to
get out of hand, you might just use some gentle reminders,
like, “I’m not sure your character’s aware of that,” or, “Can
you explain your character’s thinking when they do that?”
If the problem persists, see the guidelines mentioned in the
Problematic Players section on page 31.

PORTRAYING NPCS
Although the PCs are the stars of the game, NPCs make
the world around the PCs vibrant. They can become a part
of the story, sometimes for years, weaving into the story
right alongside the PCs. Portray NPCs however it works
for you. Some GMs keep it simple, describing the NPCs
simply by their looks, or their hook (see below). Others
go into more detail, using accents, mannerisms, or acting.
Because NPCs have smaller roles than PCs, imparting
enough information to convey their identities while they
interact with the party can be challenging. When you
create an NPC, start by integrating a single “hook” into
their concept: a widowed merchant, a refugee from a
distant realm, or a child who constantly asks awkward
questions. Each hints at a backstory but is easily described
in a synopsis. If the NPC continues to interact with the
party, you can then add to their backstory later.

NPC Limitations
Always remember that the PCs have the greatest role in
your story. Avoid including allied NPCs who could easily
solve any problem the PCs get assigned. An extremely
powerful NPC should be engaged with matters beyond
what the PCs are tasked with or have some limitation
that necessitates the PCs’ involvement. Remember that
an NPC is not “your character” in the way each player
has a character. Though NPCs who travel with the party
can be effective and fun when handled with caution, an
NPC who effectively acts as the GM’s character is often
called a GMPC (Game Master Player Character) and can
contribute to a feeling that the players are being coerced
into making certain decisions.

Betrayal
NPCs, even allies, can shift allegiances. They might betray,
fail, or sell out their companions, which can make for a
meaningful story event. If an NPC is betraying the party
in some way, lay groundwork early on so the players don’t
feel ambushed by the twist. If the players can look back
and see a clear path to this result, it is likely they’ll feel the
decision makes sense in the context of the story. Try to give
the NPC a “tell” or a paper trail they can detect.

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

Respecting the Character
Sometimes, when creating characters, a GM can
unintentionally play into themes that can be harmful or
hurtful. For example, an NPC with a background of abuse,
a former or current slave, or a character with disabilities
requires respectful handling. This is particularly true if
you, as the GM, do not have the same life experience as the
NPC in question. If you want to include these themes for
an NPC, you should probably bring it up with your players
beforehand and set expectations. You don’t need to spoil
the character, but sitting down and checking in with your
players can help prevent unpleasant surprises and is better
than assuming. To keep the representation respectful, avoid
clichés and don’t use the hook as a joke. Your group’s
guidelines for objectionable content (Core Rulebook 486)
can also help you portray NPCs respectfully.

4121763

A Proper End
An NPC’s story should have a satisfying ending. The NPC
might leave your story when they achieve a major goal,
go on to other adventures, give up their dream, or die.
The death of a beloved NPC should have weight. Make it
sympathetic and powerful, and ideally have it take place
“on stage” with the PCs present. Be prepared that NPC
deaths might stir up strong emotions within the group,
and be prepared to cut the session short or to fade to
black to mitigate the full brunt of the event if necessary.
An NPC’s death should matter beyond the PCs’ emotions
or search for revenge, too—maybe the NPC’s sacrifice
saved a village or inspired others. Let players see that
legacy carried on.

9

18833817

4121764

4121764


Gamemastery Guide

RUNNING ENCOUNTERS

Running engaging encounters can require you to track a lot of different information.
Knowing what details to prioritize can make encounters easier to run and more fun to play.

This section provides tips to help you run encounters
that are fast and entertaining to play. Though the
Core Rulebook discusses running encounters starting
on page 493, this section supplements that information.
Though this chapter contains detailed advice about many
topics, it’s important to remember that, as a GM, you
should primarily focus on the following tasks.
• Answering questions quickly and decisively
whenever possible.
• Building anticipation for what happens next.
• Emphasizing thrilling action and setting a rapid pace.
• Letting players know when they’re up, and preferably
when they’re “on deck” to go next.
• Showing the immediate consequences of actions.
If you’re interested in building on the topics in this section,
information on designing combat encounters appears on
page 46. Additionally, Chapter 3 presents subsystems used in
special types of encounters, such as the influence subsystem.

SPEED OF PLAY

Encounters should move quickly, giving the PCs just enough
time to savor successes and lament failures. This requires
effort from everyone, but you can make it easier by running
creatures and NPCs efficiently. First off, don’t worry
too much about little mistakes you make when running
encounters. If you forgot to apply a creature’s special bonus
or didn’t take an action that would have prevented the
creature from taking damage, it’s not a big deal. Keep an
eye on what you emphasize during the adventure, as well.
Be quick when describing a normal attack, but spend a
little more time on a critical hit or a big spell. This all boils
down to significance. It’s fine to slow down the game for
something important, but it’s best to move briskly through
anything less important. As you run the game, you’ll quickly
develop a sense for what’s significant and what’s not.

18833818

18833818

LOOKING UP RULES
One of the primary ways the game slows down is when you
or another player needs to look up a rule. For something
that isn’t too impactful, it’s better to just make a ruling on
the spot and move on. Tell the player they can look it up
when it’s not their turn, and you’ll play it as written after
that, but that the game needs to move on in the meantime.
It’s okay to look up something that’s both significant and
heavily rules-dependent, such as a spell description or the
death and dying rules. Even then, reciting a full chunk
of rules text can pull players out of the flow of play, so
summarize. It also helps to train your players to look
things up in advance if they think they’ll need them, so
they’re ready to go when their turns come around. This

can be tough as a GM, since it’s essentially always your
turn. However, you can ask a player to look something up
for you, or, if you need to pause long enough to reference
certain books, remind the players to plan for their next
turns while you’re busy.

REWINDING
Though “rewinding” can happen in any mode of play,
it’s usually most troublesome in encounters. Rewinding
happens when a player forgot to add in a certain bonus
or take a certain action, or wishes they had used their
actions in a different order, and wants to rewind to
account for what they missed. The best policy is usually
to let them rewind as needed within their own turn but
stop them before they intrude into someone else’s. This
keeps interruptions within reasonable bounds. You might
find some adjustments are easy enough to make outside
of a turn and can be allowed. For instance, if someone
forgot to add the fire damage from a flaming rune to one
of their hits, it’s pretty easy to reduce the monster’s HP on
another turn, but if they realized their attack missed only
because they forgot the bonus from bless, that could be too
much of an interruption. Your ruling should stand on such
matters. Try to be consistent about what kinds of things
you will rewind for and when.

4121764

COMPLEX ROLLS
You’ll often make multiple rolls at the same time, especially
when attempting saving throws for multiple creatures
against area or multi-target spells. This can sometimes take
a considerable amount of time if you’re resolving the result
of each creature’s save and then determining its degree of
success. To do so quickly, you could use one of the following
techniques. Each of the examples below uses a PC’s spell
as an example, but these recommendations also apply to
similar rolls that aren’t caused by spells.
• Get the PC’s Difficulty Class first, and have the
player roll damage while you roll the saving throws.
• Use separate colors of dice for the different types of
foes, or arrange the dice in such a way that it’s easier
for you to tell which creatures or NPCs are which.
• Go in order from the best enemy results (the highest
total) to the worst. This means you’ll need to ask for
the results on a success only once, the damage on a
failure once, and so on. It also means you only need
to figure out when you’re moving to a lower degree of
success, rather than recalculating them each time.
This can be more of a challenge when asking for PC
rolls. Make sure you get the attention of every player
whose PC is affected. Have them all roll but hold off on

10

18833818

4121765

4121765

18833819

18833819


Gamemastery Basics

announcing their results. While they roll their saves, roll
damage or other variable effects. Then, announce the DC.
Say, “who critically succeeded?” “who succeeded?” and so
on down the line, so you only have to share the results
for each category once. You can choose not to announce
the DC if you want and ask for results by multiples of 10
instead, but it typically takes longer, and it’s still possible
that the players can determine or estimate the DC anyway.

ENEMY TACTICS

undetected, but not unnoticed. That means the participant
who rolled high still knows someone is around, and can
start moving about, Seeking, and otherwise preparing to
fight. The characters Avoiding Notice still have a significant
advantage, since that character needs to spend actions and
attempt additional checks in order to find them.
What if both sides are sneaking about? They might just
sneak past each other entirely, or they might suddenly run
into one another if they’re heading into the same location.

As noted on page 493 of the Core Rulebook, enemies don’t
need to make perfect decisions. It’s usually better to make
a decision quickly than to pick the perfect enemy tactic.
The chaos of combat, desperation, or ego could all cause
a villain to make a poor decision, and that’s something
you can play up if you realize they’ve done so, acting
out the foe’s response to their own folly, or chiding them
through the sarcastic remark of one of their allies.

INITIATIVE

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

The rules for rolling initiative can be found on page 468 of
the Core Rulebook, and the GM guidelines on 498. Below
you’ll find specifics on how to run certain types of initiative
or deal with problems. These are guidelines, and you might
prefer to execute initiative in a different way at your table.
When do you ask players to roll initiative? In most
cases, it’s pretty simple: you call for the roll as soon as
one participant intends to attack (or issue a challenge,
draw a weapon, cast a preparatory spell, start a social
encounter such as a debate, or otherwise begin to use an
action that their foes can’t help but notice). A player will
tell you if their character intends to start a conflict, and
you’ll determine when the actions of NPCs and other
creatures initiate combat. Occasionally, two sides might
stumble across one another. In this case, there’s not much
time to decide, but you should still ask if anyone intends
to attack. If the PCs and NPCs alike just want to talk or
negotiate, there is no reason to roll initiative only to drop
out of combat immediately!

4121765

INITIATIVE AND STEALTH
When one or both sides of an impending battle are being
stealthy, you’ll need to deal with the impacts of Stealth on
the start of the encounter. Anyone who’s Avoiding Notice
should attempt a Stealth check for their initiative. All
the normal bonuses and penalties apply, including any
bonus for having cover. You can give them the option to
roll Perception instead, but if they do they forsake their
Stealth and are definitely going to be detected.
To determine whether someone is undetected by other
participants in the encounter, you still compare their
Stealth check for initiative to the Perception DC of their
enemies. They’re undetected by anyone whose DC they
meet or exceed. So what do you do if someone rolls
better than everyone else on initiative, but all their foes
beat their Perception DC? Well, all the enemies are

11

18833819

4121766

4121766


Gamemastery Guide

SETTING THE SCENE
When an encounter begins, spend a moment to describe the
location if you haven’t already. Use some of the description
tips found in Evocative Environments on page 17. It can help
to describe where enemies are within the environment, to
better ground them in the location. You can also use the
enemies’ expressions to better convey the location. Is an
enemy in a wary stance as they stand near a pit? Is another
irritated by water dripping on it from the ceiling? Does a
glowing glyph illuminate an enemy with a sinister red light?

BATCH INITIATIVE
If you have multiple enemies of the same type, such as
four goblin warriors, you might want to have them act
on the same initiative for simplicity. If you do, you can
roll just one initiative check for all of them. They still take
individual turns and can still individually change their
initiative by Delaying. Note that a lucky initiative check
could mean the batched creatures can easily gang up on
the PCs, and a terrible roll could mean they all get struck
down before they can do anything, so use this technique
only when necessary to keep the game moving.

PLACING CHARACTERS ON THE MAP
If the PCs are already moving on a grid, as often happens
in small dungeons, you already know where they are
when they roll initiative. If they’re moving in free-form
exploration, place them on the map when they roll
initiative. The fastest way is to have the players set up
their miniatures in a basic marching order ahead of time,
then just move them onto the map in that formation.
When that doesn’t work, such as when one or more
PCs were in a different location or the map doesn’t fit
the marching order, you can either set up the PC minis
yourself, then ask if everybody is happy with where they
are, or have the players place their own minis. If you
find having the players do it themselves causes too much
indecision (especially if they try to count out distances in
advance), you can switch methods. Remember to place
characters using Stealth in reasonable places to hide,
even if that means you have to adjust the marching order
to do so.

18833820

18833820

INAPPROPRIATE SKILLS
As described in the Core Rulebook on page 489, you can
allow PCs to roll skills other than Perception (or Stealth
when Avoiding Notice) for initiative. You might find that
once a player gets to use a stronger skill for initiative,
they’ll keep trying to use it for future encounters. As long
as the narrative plays out in a reasonable manner, it’s
fine to allow the skill. If you find that they start making
up odd circumstances to use their pet skill, or that their
justifications for using the skill take too long at the
table, just tell them you’d like them to go back to using
Perception for a while.

AD HOC BONUSES AND
PENALTIES

This section covers a few ground rules for how to best
respond to PC tactics, when to apply ad hoc bonuses
and penalties, and when to use certain tactics for NPCs.
When PCs put effort into getting advantages against
their foes, there should be some payoff provided their
tactics make sense in the narrative. Ad hoc bonuses and
penalties give you some mechanical tools to emphasize
that. Also keep in mind that you can change the flow
of the story to respond to tactics as well. Changing an
enemy’s behavior can be a more satisfying consequence
than just getting a bonus.
When you’re determining whether to grant a special
bonus that’s not defined in the rules, including when
a player asks you whether they get a bonus for doing
something, ask yourself the following questions.
• Is this the result of an interesting, surprising, or novel
strategy by the character?
• Did this take effort or smart thinking to set up?
• Is this easy to replicate in pretty much every battle?
If you answered yes to any of the first two, it’s more
likely you should assign a bonus—typically a +1 or +2
circumstance bonus. However, if you answered yes to the
third, you probably shouldn’t unless you really do want
to see that tactic used over and over again.
Try to use ad hoc bonuses a little more often than
ad hoc penalties. If you do think a penalty might be
appropriate, ask yourself the following.
• Does the environment or terrain create any applicable
disadvantages for the character?
• Should the character have expected this would be
more difficult based on what they already knew?
• Was this circumstance caused by a bad decision on
the part of the one taking the penalty?
• Is this negative circumstance easy to replicate in
pretty much every battle?
Once again, answering yes to most of these questions
means it is more likely you should apply a penalty, and
answering yes to the final question means it less likely
you should do so.

4121766

ADJUDICATING ACTIONS

Some of the basic actions of the game require you to
interpret how a rule should apply. Here, you’ll find advice
the types of rules calls that can occur frequently. For rules
decisions that are either/or (such as whether a creature
can Aid or Take Cover), a PC can usually determine
before they take the action whether doing so is viable; if it
isn’t viable for some reason, alert them that it won’t work
before they spend time, actions or resources trying. There
are some exceptions, especially if the reason an action
wouldn’t work is something a character wouldn’t know.
For example, if a character tries to Take Cover behind a
wall, not realizing it’s illusory, you shouldn’t reveal the
deception prematurely.

12

18833820

4121767

4121767

18833821

18833821


Gamemastery Basics

AID
It’s up to you whether someone’s preparation is enough to
let them Aid an ally. The preparation should be specific to
the task at hand. Helping someone hold a lockpick steady
might be enough preparation to Aid an attempt to Pick a
Lock, but just saying you’re going to “encourage” them
likely wouldn’t. Second, the character who is attempting
to Aid needs to be in a proper position to help, and able
to convey any necessary information. Helping a character
Climb a wall is pretty tough if the character a PC wishes
to Aid is nowhere near them. Similarly, a character usually
needs to be next to their ally or a foe to Aid the ally in
attacking the foe. You’ll also need to determine how long
the preparation takes. Typically, a single action is sufficient
to help with a task that’s completed in a single round, but
to help someone perform a long-term task, like research,
the character has to help until the task is finished.

READY
The Ready activity lets the acting person choose the trigger
for their readied action. However, you might sometimes
need to put limits on what they can choose. Notably,
the trigger must be something that happens in the game
world and is observable by the character rather than a
rules concept that doesn’t exist in world. For instance, if a
player says, “I Ready to shoot an arrow at her if she uses
a concentrate action,” or “I Ready to attack him if he has
fewer than 47 Hit Points,” find out what their character
is trying to specifically observe. If they don’t have a clear
answer for that, they need to adjust their action.

of the subject needs to change, or the person attempting
the check needs to receive new evidence that something is
out of the ordinary. If another PC tries to Sense Motive,
gets different information about the target, and shares it,
that doesn’t really count as new information for a PC who
tried previously. Rather, it’s up to the players to roleplay
out any changes in their thinking as a result.

introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools

TAKE COVER
You’ll often need to determine whether someone can Take
Cover. They usually just need a large enough object to
hide behind. Imagine the character crouching, and picture
whether the object could almost entirely cover up their
silhouette. Taking Cover might also require them to Drop
Prone, such as if they want to take cover under a table.
Most of the time, you can let them combine this with the
Take Cover action instead of using 2 separate actions.

MAPS AND MINIATURES

The Seek action leaves it up to you how long a search
should take. Use common sense. Most of the time,
just trying to spot a creature hiding in a small area, or
something else you could find with a simple Seek action
rather than a long-term Search exploration activity,
should default to a single action. The biggest distinction
is whether something uses 3 actions or fewer—and can
therefore be accomplished in a single turn—or requires
more than that and can’t be accomplished in an encounter
at all. Consider whether it makes sense for the character
to pull this off during the encounter or not, and whether
that could be an interesting wrinkle in the story.

A grid and miniatures can make it easier to visualize combat
for players and give a visual centerpiece for the players to
focus on. Some advice for drawing maps appears on pages
52–53. A setup can range from a basic grid with some hasty
marker lines and coins for miniatures to a full-color FlipMat with official prepainted minis or cardboard pawns,
all the way to a set of 3-D dungeon terrain and handpainted minis for each character. Many online tabletops
have preset maps, token packs, and built‑in functions for
movement and line of sight. All these are fun to play on!
Your setup should match your time commitment, budget,
and the aesthetics you want.
You can also bring the setting alive by describing sensory
details like sounds, smells, temperature, and 3-D elements
that aren’t represented on your map. Including the echoing
ring of a sword striking a shield, an errant ray of frost
freezing solid an apple in a bowl of fruit on the table, and
the like makes the game feel more alive.
Placing miniatures on a grid can make it feel like you
need to be exacting with the rules, but there’s still room for
improvisation! You might give another 5 feet of movement
to someone running downhill if it will make their turn more
dramatic. You’re empowered to give players minor boosts
that fit the story you want to tell, and to fill in nuances of the
location beyond the elements covered in the Core Rulebook.

SENSE MOTIVE

COVER

When someone tries to Sense the Motive of an NPC,
you’ll need to figure out how to convey the information
they receive. It’s best to try to convey this indirectly, such
as by describing a lying target’s body language, odd word
choices, sweating, or other details rather than saying, “They
aren’t behaving normally.” However, sometimes dropping
a punchy, “Oh, she is 100% lying about this!” on a critical
success can be satisfying. You also might need to determine
when the situation changes enough for someone to try to
Sense Motive again. Usually, this means either the behavior

You determine whether a character has cover. The rules
for drawing lines found in the Core Rulebook are useful in
simple cases, but in more complicated situations, use your
own discretion to make the call. Consider the details of the
environment and 3-D space beyond what’s on the battle
mat. For instance, hanging banners might give cover, or a
PC who has climbed onto a ledge might have a clear shot at
an enemy standing behind a short wall. Be generous to PCs
who use creativity to get into smart positions, especially if
they spend valuable actions to move or Take Cover.

SEEK

1

Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121767

13

18833821

4121768

4121768


Gamemastery Guide

VARIANT RULES ON THE GRID
These two variants can change up how distance and
movement work in your game.

UNIFORM DIAGONALS
If you like, your group can count all diagonals as 5 feet instead
of counting every other diagonal as 10 feet. This speeds up
play, but some people find it breaks their suspension of
disbelief. This is most noticeable when someone moves a
long distance along a diagonal all at once or when characters
start moving diagonally as much as possible to cover more
distance. Using this variant requires thinking of the game
map in more abstract terms, and less like a real physical
environment where the map is accurately reflecting the size
of the room or encounter area. You can choose whether you
measure radius-based areas of spells in the same way or
visualize them as circles or other round shapes. The latter
works best if you have templates to use.

HEX GRIDS
Some of the challenges of diagonal movement can be fixed
by using a hex grid instead of a square grid, or by using a
grid with offset squares, which works similarly. This allows
you to count movement the same in all directions. However,
it makes flanking a bit harder to pull off, requires you to
arrange standard Large and larger miniatures differently,
and causes challenges when drawing maps that consist
primarily of rectangular structures, since you’ll have a lot of
partially occupied hexes.

18833822

18833822

SPLITTING AND COMBINING MOVEMENT
The different types of actions representing movement are
split up for convenience of understanding how the rules
work with a creature’s actions. However, you can end up
in odd situations, such as when a creature wants to jump
vertically to get something and needs to move just a bit to
get in range, then Leap, then continue moving. This can
end up feeling like they’re losing a lot of their movement
to make this happen. At your discretion, you can allow the
PCs to essentially combine these into one fluid movement
as a 2-action activity: moving into range for a Leap, then
Leaping, then using the rest of their Speed.
This typically works only for chaining types of movement
together. Doing something like Interacting to open a door
or making a Strike usually arrests movement long enough
that doing so in the middle of movement isn’t practical.

GOING GRIDLESS
As described on page 494 of the Core Rulebook, you can
play encounters without a grid. This is best for groups who
can easily imagine their surroundings without a visual aid,
and for battles that don’t require understanding a complex
physical space. Your game doesn’t have to be entirely
on or entirely off maps—you might decide to play out
most simple fights without a grid, then use one for highly

tactical fights or major set pieces. As noted in the Core
Rulebook, the 3-action structure is your best friend. You
might find yourself answering a lot of questions about
actions and space, like “Can I get there this turn,” or
“How many of the gnolls can I catch in a fireball?” If you
find yourself needing to repeatedly remind players of the
physical features of the environment or enemy positioning,
that might mean you’re making your encounters too
tactical for what a gridless game supports. This style works
better to encourage imaginative, cinematic action and
quick play without getting too hung up on details.

SPECIAL BATTLES AND
MOVEMENT

The Core Rulebook covers the essential rules for
mounted, aerial, and aquatic combat on page 478, but
more complex battles can require specialized rules.

MOUNTED COMBAT
The logistics of mounted combat take some extra work.
If you know one is coming up, make sure the fight takes
place in a location with plenty of space to move, since
you’ll likely be dealing with multiple larger creatures. For
a fight in which only one side has mounts, you might want
an environment with a few areas too small for mounts,
so the side on foot can get a tactical advantage there to
offset the other side’s greater mobility.
When the PCs are mounted, their enemies should focus
most of their attacks on the PCs, not their mounts. Having
foes target PCs’ mounts too often gets really annoying, so
have the enemies remember who the real threat is! When PCs
fight mounted enemies, try to keep the mount’s level fairly
close to the PCs, rather than putting a 13th‑level enemy on
a 2nd-level war horse, use an 11th‑level greater nightmare
or something similar. This will fit better thematically and
prevent the enemy from being dismounted too easily. If a
mount is knocked out, the rider might be able to dismount
without trouble if the mount was stationary, but if they were
in motion, you should probably have the rider attempt a
Reflex save. If they fail, the rider is thrown a short distance
and falls prone. Setting a simple expert DC of 20 often
works well for such checks.
Mounted combat on a grid is difficult for a running fight
with both sides racing at full speed. For something like
that, it can be better to no grid at all, though miniatures
can still help for relative positioning and distances for
ranged attacks. For such a race, consider using the chase
subsystem instead (page 156).

4121768

Different Types of Mounts
The mount rules are for common cases: humanoids riding
quadrupedal animals. However, you might allow someone
to ride a beast or other type of creature by making a few
adjustments. For an intelligent mount (such as a pegasus or
unicorn), use the standard rules for mounted combat, but
instead of attempting a check to Command an Animal, the

14

18833822

4121769

4121769


Gamemastery Basics

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18833823

18833823

4121769

rider uses the same number of actions to ask the creature
to do what they want. As the GM, you determine whether
the creature does as requested and whether Diplomacy
checks or the like are needed. It’s recommended you
disallow humanoid creatures and most other bipeds as
mounts, especially if they are PCs. If you choose to allow
this anyway, either the rider or mount should use at least
one hand to hold onto the other, and both should spend an
action on each of their turns to remain mounted.

AERIAL COMBAT
Determining positioning in the air can be tricky, and
it’s often best to be more relaxed with movement rules,
flanking, and so forth than you would be on a flat grid.
Note that battles can get more spread out with flight. If
any creature is flying, it’s important to establish the height
of potential obstacles in the area early. This way, no one’s
surprised to suddenly find out the ceiling is lower than they
thought or tall trees create a barrier. Be careful about using
aerial combat before PCs have magic that lets them fly. Be
especially careful with flying foes who use ranged attacks,
because PCs might have few good tools to fight them.
The rules for flight say that a creature might need to
attempt an Acrobatics check to Maneuver in Flight to
pull off tricky maneuvers. You can generally use the same
judgment you would for calling for Acrobatics checks
when someone’s moving on the ground. Trying to dive

through a narrow space, make a sharp turn, or the like
might require checks, usually with a simple DC.
Falls can be deadly, and often happen when fly or a
similar spell gets dispelled. This is part of the risk of
flying! Flying enemies might keep closer to the ground to
avoid this danger, or have the feather fall spell to prevent
the damage or a jade cat talisman to reduce it.

AQUATIC COMBAT
The rules in the Core Rulebook are fairly generous to allow
high-action battles underwater. Two significant challenges
for non-aquatic creatures are breathing underwater (or
holding their breath) and lacking a swim Speed. It’s often
best to save aquatic adventure until higher levels when
PCs can get magical solutions for these problems, but you
can instead give out such magic early, since it’s not easy
to exploit in land-based adventures the way flight magic
can be. As with flight, dispelling can be deadly if someone
relies on magic to breathe underwater. It’s generally best to
avoid having enemies who can breathe underwater dispel
the water-breathing magic aiding PCs. Though PCs might
be able to use air bubble and quickly cast water breathing
again, having this happen repeatedly can be frustrating,
and being forced to prepare an extremely high-level water
breathing spell to avoid it isn’t much fun either. Lacking
a swim Speed is easier to deal with, except for characters
with poor Athletics, who might need to strategize around

15

18833823

4121770

4121770


Gamemastery Guide

THREATS IN PUBLISHED ADVENTURES
When you reach an encounter in a published adventure, it
will give you an indication of the expected party level and
what threat the encounter is for that level of party, such
as “moderate 3” for an encounter that’s a moderate threat
to a 3rd-level party. If your party reaches the encounter
at a different level, you could recalculate the XP for each
enemy individually, or you can estimate the threat posed by
adjusting a step down or up per level difference. For example,
the moderate 3 encounter would be severe 2, extreme 1, low
4, or trivial 5. If you still think the group can take it on as-is,
you can use that estimation for determining XP, maybe
giving a little extra if it ended up being tougher than you
expected. Or, if you think it would be better, you can adapt
the particulars of the encounter to be a more reasonable
challenge to your party, usually by adjusting the number of
monsters or using the elite and weak adjustments.

their shortcomings. The DC to Swim underwater shouldn’t
be very high—typically 15, or 13 in calm water.
When someone gets knocked out underwater, they usually
float up or sink down. You decide based on their buoyancy;
most adventurers carry a heavy enough load to sink.
When one group is in water and another outside it,
note that the aquatic combat rules for attacks apply when
either party is in water. You might judge that a character
in the water is concealed against someone outside it due to
distortion, and vice versa.

18833824

18833824

UNEXPECTED DIFFICULTY

What do you do when an encounter ends up being far more
or less challenging than you anticipated? If the encounter
is unlikely to kill all the characters, it might be best to roll
with it, unless the fight is so frustrating that no one really
wants to continue it. If it is likely to kill everyone, strongly
consider ways to end the encounter differently. The villain
might offer the PCs the chance to surrender, consider
their task complete and leave, or use their advantage to
get something else they want. If the worst does happen,
suggestions for dealing with a total party kill can be found
on page 30.
If a battle is too easy, it’s often best to let the players
enjoy their dominance. However, if you intended this to be
a centerpiece battle, that might feel anticlimactic. Look for
ways the enemy might escape or bring in reinforcements, but
the PCs’ success should still matter. Make sure the PCs feel
the enemy’s desperation—possibly have the enemy sacrifice
something important to them to secure their escape.
In both these cases, consider whether the discrepancy
from your expectations is due to luck. One side benefiting
from extreme luck is to be expected from time to time.
However, if the challenge comes down to a factor you had
control over as a GM—like unfavorable terrain making
things hard for the PCs or a monster with an overpowered
ability—it’s more likely you should make adjustments.

SOCIAL ENCOUNTERS

Sometimes you’ll want to run a social conflict in encounter
mode. The basic guidelines on how to do so appear on
page 494 of the Core Rulebook, and this section expands
on them with additional advice and examples. Social
encounters still require opposition—typically an adversary
arguing against you, but sometimes institutional opposition
or strongly held beliefs. It’s important to note that some
NPCs are much more adept at certain types of social
encounters than at combat. You can find guidelines on
creating such NPCs on pages 72–73, and some examples
in the NPC Gallery chapter. The Core Rulebook suggests
a few means of measuring success and progress in social
encounters. If you want something more detailed, look
at Victory Points on page 148 of this book, or the more
specific rules for Influence on page 151.
As noted in the Core Rulebook, social encounters don’t
usually use 6-second rounds. The time scale you use can
be flexible. Usually, you’ll want a participant to go on just
long enough to make one salient point and attempt one
check before moving to the next character in the initiative
order. Be flexible and encouraging as you run a social
encounter, and don’t worry about nitty-gritty details like
character movement except in extreme cases. Allow the
PCs to share information about as freely as the players
can around the table. If one character is watching the
opponent for signs they’re lying, assume they can easily
convey that to other characters subtly. It’s good to remind
players of things their characters might know or be likely
to notice even if the players, in the moment, don’t have
them in mind. Describe NPCs’ mental states and ask for
clarification about the PCs’ attitudes when needed. The
following list describes various types of social encounters
that PCs may find themselves in.
• Besting a rival bard in a battle of wits
• Brokering peace between warring groups
• Convincing a dragon not to eat the party
• Convincing a monarch to defend against an invasion
• Disproving a rival’s scientific theories before an
alchemists’ guild assembly
• Ending a tense standoff
• Exposing a slippery villain’s deception before a court
of nobles
• Getting a desperate criminal to free a hostage
• Persuading a clan to trust their ancient rivals
• Petitioning for admittance to a magical academy
• Proving someone’s innocence in front of a judge
• Securing a major contract over a rival
• Quelling an angry mob
• Swaying a fallen priest to return to the faith
• Tricking a charlatan into contradicting their past lies
• Turning a leader against their corrupted advisor
• Turning a low-ranking cultists against their leader
• Urging a lawmaker to grant clemency or a stay of
execution
• Wining a debate about a contentious topic

4121770

16

18833824

4121771

4121771


Gamemastery Basics

RUNNING EXPLORATION

Exploration covers a wide variety of situations, letting the group’s creativity and storytelling
shine. You can also use it to control the pace of the game, guided by the number of
interesting locations and phenomena in the area being explored and the level of detail you
want to go into.

introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools

The Core Rulebook discusses running exploration mode
starting on page 496 of that book, and this section
supplements that information. If you want to run a session
or adventure specifically focused on exploring and mapping
uncharted wilds, consider using the hexploration subsystem
on page 170. If you’re looking for guidelines on managing
initiative, see page 11 in the Running Encounters section.
As you run exploration, keep the following basic goals
in mind. You’ll find more advice on many of these points
in the sections ahead.
• Evoke the setting with sensory details.
• Shift the passage of time to emphasize tension and
uncertainty, and speed past uneventful intervals.
• Get players to add details by asking for their reactions.
• Present small-scale mysteries to intrigue players and
spur investigation.
• When rolls are needed, look for ways to move the
action forward or add interesting wrinkles on a failure.
• Plan effective transitions to encounters.
18833825

18833825

1

EVOCATIVE
ENVIRONMENTS

As the PCs explore, convey their surroundings by
appealing to the players’ senses. This sets the scene,
gives them a better sense of their environment, and can
be used to foreshadow what they might find ahead.
When determining which details to cover, think about
what’s familiar versus novel. A new dungeon might have
similar architecture to previous ones but feature ancient
structures that set it apart. You can use the PCs’ familiarity
as a tool to single out what’s new. When preparing for a
game, imagine yourself in the environment and jot down
a few notes about what you would sense. Conveying these
details keeps the players on the same page about what
they sense, even if each character responds to it differently.
Keep in mind that the more you explain something, the
more important it seems. This is valuable for you to drive
interest, but can also be a mixed blessing, since describing
something inconsequential to set the mood can lead players
off on a tangent. Sometimes, the best solution is to find a
way to make that unimportant thing as important as the
players think it is!

FLOW OF TIME

As noted in the Core Rulebook, you rarely measure
exploration down to the second or minute. If someone
asks how long something takes, the nearest 10-minute
increment typically does the job. (For long voyages, the

nearest hour might be more appropriate.) You convey the
passage of time through your descriptions, but not just by
addressing it outright. In a roleplaying game, information
and time are linked. Time will seem to slow down the
more detail you give. Think cinematically! A long voyage
through a series of tunnels works well as a montage,
whereas progress searching a statue for traps could be a
relayed as a series of distressing details in quick succession,
and would feel more tense due to that precision.
With that in mind, when is it best to speed up or slow
down the passage of game time? Usually, you’ll slow
down and give more description when you’re establishing
something or progressing the story. When the PCs enter
a dungeon or a new area, describe how it feels, slowing
down to give the players a sense of what’s ahead. When
a PC stops to do something important or makes a key
decision, and slowing down gives that moment its desired
weight. You can also adjust the flow of time to reflect
PCs’ mental states. As a PC returns home after decades
away, you might pause to ask the player what their PC
is feeling, matching time to the rush of memories and
emotions filling that PC’s thoughts.

Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121771

EXPLORATION
ACTIVITIES

As described starting on page 479 of the Core Rulebook,
PCs will undertake exploration activities while they
explore. The purpose of these activities within the game is
to clarify what a PC focuses on as they explore rather than
being able to unrealistically do all things simultaneously.
This adds variety within the group’s behavior and can
show you where players want the story to go. For example,
a player whose PC is Investigating carvings on the walls
shows you that the player wants those to be informative.
Exploration activities that happen continually as
the group explores are meant to be narrative first and
foremost, with the player describing to you what they’re
doing, and then you determining which an activity applies,
plus any details or alterations for the situation. If a player
says, “I’m Avoiding Notice,” add more detail by asking
what precautions they’re taking or by telling them which
passages they think are least guarded. Likewise, if a player
says they’re looking for traps and keeping their shield
raised and covering the group’s tracks, ask them which is
most important to narrow down the activity. Consider the
advantages and disadvantages of an activity given current
circumstances. For instance, someone Scouting might
encounter thin ice and fall through before their group can

17

18833825

4121772

4121772


Gamemastery Guide

Sights choppy water, rolling waves, sunlight glinting, the
curve of the horizon, driftwood
Sounds waves lapping against a ship, seabirds’ cries,
fluttering sails, creatures breaching the surface
Smells salt water, crisp fresh air, dead fish
Textures frigid water, slimy seaweed, crusty salt collecting
on surfaces
Weather powerful winds, oncoming storms

ARCTIC
Sights blinding reflected sunlight, snowy plains, distant
glaciers, deep crevasses, rocky cliffs, ice floes and bergs,
animal tracks in snow
Sounds howling winds, drips of melting ice, utter quiet
Smells clean air, half-frozen bog, lichen, seaweed
Textures crunching snow, hard ice
Weather frigid gales, light snowfall, pounding blizzard

FOREST
Sights towering trees, dense undergrowth, verdant canopies,
colorful wildlife, dappled sunlight through the trees, mossy
tree trunks, twisted roots
Sounds rustling leaves, snapping branches, animal calls
Smells decomposing vegetation, flowering plants, pine trees,
earthy mushrooms
Textures leaves crunching underfoot, scraping branches,
water dripping from above, rough bark
Weather still air, cool shade, sporadic breeze, rain on the
canopy, branches coated in thick snow

18833826

18833826

QUICK ENVIRONMENTAL DETAILS

AQUATIC

MOUNTAIN
Sights bare cliffs, snow caps, hardy trees, slopes littered
with scree, fallen rocks, birds flying on currents, fog among
the peaks
Sounds howling wind, falling rocks, clear echoes, crunch of

reach them, or someone Investigating ancient hieroglyphs
might critically fail and lead the party in the wrong
direction. This does not apply for exploration activities
that are discrete and occur when the group is taking a
pause or zooming in on a particular action, such as Treat
Wounds. Characters can always drop out of a continual
exploration activity to perform a discrete one (even if they
are fatigued and can’t sustain an exploration activity as
they travel), and they can change activities at any time.
The Core Rulebook covers how to adjudicate specific
activities—Detect Magic, Follow the Expert, Investigate,
and Search—on page 496.

MORE ON SEARCHING
The rules for Searching deliberately avoid giving intricate
detail on how long a search takes. That’s left in your hands
because the circumstances of a search can vary widely.

rocks underfoot, distant avalanche
Smells blowing dust, pine trees, fresh snow
Textures rough stone, powdery snow, unstable rubble
Weather swirling clouds, chill of high altitude, direct
sunlight, powerful wind and rain

PLAINS
Sights grass waving gently, scattered wildflowers, rocky
outcroppings or boulders, the curve of the horizon
Sounds rustling wind, birdsong, distant sounds carried far
Smells fresh air, earthy soil, distant carcasses
Textures touch of tall grass, rasp of scrub brush, crunch of
dry dirt
Weather cooling of gentle wind, heat of direct sunlight,
massive black thunderclouds

SWAMP
Sights lush leaves, clouds of gnats, algae-coated water,
shacks on stilts, darting fish
Sounds croaking frogs, chirping insects, bubbling, splashing
Smells rich moss and algae, pungent swamp gases
Textures pushing through floating detritus, tangling
creepers, thick mud
Weather oppressive humidity, still air, pouring rain, rays of
sunlight

UNDERGROUND

4121772

Sights winding passages, sputtering yellow torchlight,
uneven or cracked floors, ancient writings or architecture,
stalagmites and stalactites
Sounds dripping condensation, scurrying rats or insects,
distant clunks of machinery, tinny echoes of your voices and
footsteps
Smells staleness of still air, sulfur, tang of metal deposits
Textures rough rock walls, erosion-smoothed stone, cobwebs
Weather chill of underground air, geothermal heat

If the group isn’t in any danger and has time for a really
thorough search, that’s a good time to allow them to
automatically succeed, rather than bothering to roll, or
you might have them roll to see how long it takes before
they find what they’re looking for, ultimately finding it
eventually no matter the result. Conversely, if they stop
for a thorough search in the middle of a dungeon, that’s
a good time for their efforts to draw unwanted attention!
PCs might get to attempt another check if their initial
search is a bust. But when do you allow them to try again?
It’s best to tie this to taking a different tactic. Just saying “I
search it again” isn’t enough, but if a PC tries a different
method or has other tools at their disposal, it could work.
Be generous with what you allow, as long as the player puts
thought into it! If you know a search isn’t going to turn
up anything useful, make that clear early on so the group
doesn’t waste too much time on it. If they’re determined to

18

18833826

4121773

4121773


Gamemastery Basics

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18833827

18833827

4121773

keep going—which they often are—you might have them
find something useful but minor in the search.

MORE ON FOLLOW THE EXPERT
Follow the Expert is a truly versatile activity that lets a PC
who’s lacking at a skill or exploration activity have a better
chance to succeed. It’s important that this doesn’t become
too rote. Let the players decide how one of them is helping
out the other. The description can give you more to work
with and add fun color to the exploration beyond just the
mechanics. Also, if one PC helps another in the same way
over and over, that could be a sign of the character being
helped growing in a particular way. If the rogue has been
helping the fighter Avoid Notice over and over, the fighter
is essentially receiving training in Stealth at that point and
might want to consider taking or retraining a skill increase
to make that true. Connections like these can breathe life
into the characters and their relationships, and it can help
promote camaraderie and interactions between characters.

IMPROVISING NEW ACTIVITIES
The list of exploration activities isn’t exhaustive. More
appear in special subsystems and adventures, and you’ll
often need to create your own. When making your own,
it’s usually fine to just consider whether the amount of
effort the PC has to put in is comparable to the other
exploration activities and go from there. If you’re having

trouble, try finding a comparable activity. For example,
if the PC are Swimming as they explore, consider that
travel speeds are based on the equivalent of 1 action per
6 seconds, and that other exploration activities the PCs
can keep up without getting tired are generally based on
alternating between 2 actions per 12 seconds, averaging to
1 action per 6 seconds. (Defend, for example, is based on
using 1 action to Stride then 1 to Raise your Shield, which
is why the PC moves at half Speed.) Hustle is a good
example of an activity that can’t be done indefinitely, so
you can use it as a model for strenuous activities where the
PCs are using the equivalent of 2 actions every 6 seconds.
When improvising an exploration activity, have in mind
some advantages and disadvantages of that activity to
inspire you. What else might the PC be neglecting while
doing this activity? How does it interplay with activities
the rest of the party uses? If the new activity seems like
it’s a better option than other activities all or nearly all
the time, chances are you might want to adjust it so it’s
more balanced. Eventually, you’ll start to find which
exploration activities your group enjoys the most.

SCENES WITHIN
EXPLORATION

It can help you to think of exploration as a series of scenes,
with encounters not just breaking up exploration, but
functioning as subsections within it. Many of these are

19

18833827

4121774

4121774


Gamemastery Guide

18833828

18833828

4121774

based on geography, for example, with exploring a series of
dungeon corridors as one scene and entering the dungeon’s
great hall another. Other times, you’ll break out of a scene
at a point of interest. If the PCs decide to stop their travels
and investigate a statue, think of that as a new scene.
This gives you a good point to describe the transition
between scenes. Describe what was happening to reinforce
where the group was, then describe what they now face
to show the change. For example, “You’ve been making
your way through this long hallway, but after a moment
of debate, you stop, your footsteps and voices still echoing
down the hall. The stone statue before you is seven feet
high, adorned with rubies. It represents... maybe a god? Its
face is damaged and broken. What do you do?”
When playing out a scene, your initial description
should set the expectation of what level of detail the
scene might go into, with you and the players adjusting
as needed as you play. Also, it can be useful to go from
PC to PC to avoid everybody talking at once. Start with
someone who instigated the scene change, if possible,
or perhaps the PC using the most relevant exploration
activity, like a PC Investigating artwork or Searching for
secrets in the example above.

HAZARDS
The task of looking for and disarming hazards comes up
frequently in exploration and is an example of a type of

exploration scene. Hazards don’t usually appear out of
nowhere. A trap might be on a door’s lock, at a specific
bend in a corridor, or so on. You could have a pit trap in
the middle of a large room, but a surprise that’s entirely
unexpected can be pretty unsatisfying. The same pit trap
appearing in the middle of a 10-foot-wide, suspiciously
featureless hallway can make the players say, “Okay, we
should have seen that coming,” with even that minimal
amount of foreshadowing.
When a complex hazard triggers, move to encounter
mode. Simple hazards are usually dealt with in exploration
mode, but that doesn’t mean they should be glossed over.
Give a clear picture of what action by a PC set off the
hazard, what happens as the hazard activates, and any
aftereffects. PCs have many ways to heal themselves, so
keep in mind that a damaging hazard won’t always have
a huge effect. They tend to work best if their activation
might alert creatures in the area, lock the PCs out of an
area, or cause a similar setback beyond just damage.
If a PC detects a hazard and wants to disable it, slow
down a bit. Ask the player to describe what the PC is
doing and give concrete details about how their efforts
pan out to make it feel more real. It’s good if the player
sweats a little bit! It’s supposed to be a tense situation,
after all. If a hazard requires multiple checks to disable,
it’s good to describe what happens with each success to
show incremental progress.

20

18833828

4121775

4121775

18833829

18833829


Gamemastery Basics

INVESTIGATIONS
The Investigate exploration activity is pretty broad and
can lead into a more thorough investigation scene. Lead
off with a definite clue that has details but clearly isn’t
the whole picture: “These runes look like ones used for
arcane magic but are some kind of variant form,” “As
you assess the architecture of the room, you see the pillar
caps are all made of granite, except for one that appears
to be painted plaster,” or “Each of the stained glass shows
scenes of one of the god Norgorber’s aspects, but there are
only three windows, and Norgorber has four aspects.”
Then, if this piques a player’s interest, you can go
into a more detailed investigation. They might
look at the runes more closely, chip away
at the plaster, or search around for a
representation of Norgorber’s
fourth aspect. Avoid calling
for checks if it’s not
necessary. In the last
example, you’d likely
tell them which of the
deity’s aspects is missing
without another Religion
check, and if the aspect is
represented as a statue in the room, asking for a Perception
check to find it might short-circuit the investigation in an
uninteresting way.
To make the investigation feel real, it helps to talk the
player through their character’s thought processes by
saying what clue inspired them to think of an important
detail, explaining what the detail is, and possibly
mentioning a further question that detail raises. Then
let the player extrapolate rather than telling them their
conclusion. Even if the investigation doesn’t lead to a an
unambiguous conclusion, the players should feel they’re
more informed than when they started.
Though one person starts the investigation, getting
others involved can help them become more interested
and bring different skills to bear to get other types of
information. Reward collaboration and clever ideas.

GETTING LOST

When PCs are exploring the wilderness or twisting
dungeon corridors, they might get lost. This is most likely
if they fail to Sense their Direction using Survival but can
also happen based on the story, such as if they drop out
of a portal in some strange land or come up from an
underground passageway into a forest. Playing through
the process of wandering in the wilderness and trying to
find their way can be fun for a party, provided it’s a fairly
short interval. If a party is lost at the start of a session,
they should usually have found their way and reached a
significant destination by the end.
The Sense Direction activity uses Survival to find north.
You can combine this with Recalling Knowledge about
the area—typically using Nature or Society—for the PCs

to get their initial bearings. The DCs for these checks are
normally trained or expert if the group is still fairly close
to settlements or established nations but might be higher
in deep wilderness. As the PCs try to find their way, think
of ways to include notable landmarks they can seek out
or stumble upon. Some of these might be useful, such as a
great tree off in the distance they can climb to get a better
vantage point or a mountain slope where multiple plumes
of smoke billow up, indicating a settlement. Others might
be mysterious or dangerous, such as
haunted glades or animal hunting
grounds. When the PCs first look
around or scout, pick two or
three landmarks to point out.
Let the group decide on
their course from there.
If the trek takes
multiple days, you
can move through
each day pretty quickly.
You might need to have the group Subsist if they run out
of food, and you might want to include some encounters
if they’re in a dangerous area. For these encounters,
choose creatures that live in that type of environment.
Remember that not all creatures attack on sight. Friendly
or cautious creatures might approach, resulting in more
interactive scenes that might even help the PCs.
If the PCs get unlucky or are just awful at Survival,
you might end up stuck with no way for them to reorient
themselves. In these cases, have someone come to them!
They might get captured by local humanoids or monsters
or stumble upon a dangerous location. They’ve figured
out where they are, even if it’s not where they wanted
to be!

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121775

SURPRISE ATTACKS

Page 499 of the Core Rulebook covers the mechanics of
how surprise attacks occur while PCs rest. Such surprise
attacks should be used sparingly, even in dangerous
areas. The fact that PCs are in a group scares away
most animals and setting a watch can deter even more
attackers. Surprise attacks are most likely if the PCs did
something in advance that would lead to the ambush. For
instance, they might be ambushed by bandits if they were
flaunting their wealth or showing off expensive items
earlier in the session, or they might be counterattacked
by enemies if they attack the enemies first, only to retreat
to rest. If the PCs set up camp hastily and decide not to
set a watch, they might be in trouble if they’re attacked.
This should happen only in cases of extreme sloppiness,
since if you take advantage of minor lapses, you might
end up with a group that repeatedly spends an inordinate
amount of time describing all their camping preparation
to keep it from happening again. It’s usually better to ask
the PCs if they’re setting up watches, rather than assume
that their silence on the issue means they aren’t.

21

18833829

4121776

4121776


Gamemastery Guide

RUNNING DOWNTIME

There’s more to life than fighting monsters and looting treasure. What happens when a PC
wins a deed to a tavern in a game of cards, crafts a magical item, builds a home, or pursues
a relationship? All these goals and more are resolved by running downtime.
You can use downtime in a variety of ways that can
streamline gameplay and flesh out the story, such as to:
• Demonstrate changes to the setting that result from
the PCs’ previous achievements, giving them time to
breathe and appreciate what they’ve accomplished.
• Emphasize the PCs’ planning and the fruit it bears.
• Avoid bogging the game down, even if a great deal of
time passes. Keep the number of rolls small.
• Bring back compelling NPCs or plot threads
established in previous downtime or adventures.
• Interject interesting events and scenes related to what
the PCs do to make the world feel more alive.
• Switch to encounter or exploration more as needed
when actions spur a new scene or adventure.
This section covers advice on how to fit downtime to suit
your group. The amount and complexity can vary greatly
depending on the game. You can find the basics of running
downtime on page 500 of the Core Rulebook.

DEPTH OF DOWNTIME

Determine how involved your group wants downtime to
be at the start of the game. If your players vary greatly in
preference, you might need to find a middle ground, or
some way to give the players least interested in downtime
something they would find compelling. You can adjust
downtime depth as the game goes along, and you might find
it becomes more important to the players as their connection
to the setting grows stronger.
Pay attention to the amount of real-world time you spend
in downtime and the level of detail. Downtime should
rarely last a whole session. Usually, a half hour between
significant adventures is about right, and 15 minutes for
shorter lulls in the action, such as when PCs return to a
town briefly in the middle of an adventure. You can extend
this as needed for more detailed roleplaying scenes.
For the level of detail, it’s important to give more than
just an overview, but often the basics will do. “A fleet of
merchant ships arrives in the port, and an officer puts you
to work unloading cargo” might do for using Sailing Lore
to Earn Income, and “Your shipment of iron arrives late,
but you’re able to complete the armor” could be enough for
Crafting. Go deeper if the player sets out to do something
specific or asks questions you think have potential for an
interesting story, but be careful with too much detail, as
you run the risk of boring most of the table with minutiae.

18833830

18833830

GROUP ENGAGEMENT
One major challenge of downtime is keeping the whole
group involved. When you can, combine multiple people’s

tasks into one. For instance, if one PC wants to Earn
Income with Performance and another wants to offer
their services as a medic, you might say that a traveling
caravan is stopping briefly, seeking entertainment and
treatment for diseases and injuries their group suffered
on the road. That means you can put both PCs in the
same scene. You can also look for downtime activities
that affect multiple characters’ interests. For instance, if
the rogue’s contact at the thieves’ guild wants a special
magical cloak, a different PC might Craft that cloak.
PCs can help each other more directly. For instance,
if the barbarian’s player doesn’t plan to do anything
in downtime, you might let the barbarian Aid another
character in crafting weapons—feeding the forge and
working the bellows, for instance.
If a player really isn’t interested in downtime, they might
not want to engage at all. In that case, it’s best to shorten
the time you spend on downtime and give their actions a
one-sentence description. If other players want a deeper
downtime experience, consider extending game sessions or
running side sessions for just those players.

4121776

CAMPAIGNS WITHOUT DOWNTIME
There are two ways you might end up with a game that
has no downtime: no time and no interest. In the first, the
story moves along so quickly that the PCs don’t really have
time to engage with downtime. Think of it like a breakneck
action movie, where the characters barely have time to
breathe before they’re on to the next challenge, and even
the end of an adventure is a cliffhanger.
In the second, you and the other players just don’t care
about downtime at all. It doesn’t interest you. In this case,
just summarize what happens between adventures and
skip using any downtime rules.
If you skip downtime, you might not need to adjust your
game. The money PCs can earn during downtime is minor
compared to what they can gain through adventures.
However, the PCs will have less choice in what items they
get if they don’t Craft or earn extra money to buy items.

LONG-TERM GOALS

Downtime’s more satisfying when the PCs work toward
long-term goals rather than perform disconnected tasks.
You can ask players what their PCs’ goals are, and also
look for storylines they’re interested in that you can use
as seeds for long-term goals. Long-term goals might
include running a business, creating a guild, establishing
an arcane school, returning a despoiled land to its natural
splendor, reforming local politics, or rebuilding a ruin.

22

18833830

4121777

4121777


Gamemastery Basics

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18833831

18833831

4121777

Goals involving organizations are a good opportunity to
use the leadership subsystem on page 168. If players don’t
have clear ideas for their goals, look at their backgrounds,
NPCs they know, and things they’ve expressed interest in
during adventures to develop some suggestions. Remember
that you’re not trying to get them to accept your exact
suggestions, but to pick a goal they really like.
Long-term goals should shape the game, and reinforcing
their progress is key. Show changes, good and bad, that
result from the PCs’ efforts, both in downtime and on
their adventures if applicable. This doesn’t have to be
subtle! You can directly say, “You’ve been trying to get the
magistrate to allow you to buy this plot of land, but the
fact that you entered the wizard’s tower illegally seems to
have soured him toward you.”
Think ahead in stages. For instance, if a PC wants to run
a business, you might have them...
• Start with a simple stand to sell their wares.
• Show they’re drawing big crowds and need to expand.
• Build a storefront.
• Open to modest success.
• Get a small but loyal following.
• Hire employees to keep up with demand.
• Deal with supply issues or competition.
• Get enough interest in a nearby settlement that they
might want to expand their business.
And so on. You can deliver each of these details through

a little vignette. For example, if you use the second bullet
point, you might describe the throng of people crowded
around the PCs’ stand, and say they sold out of goods
before half the people were served. Downtime goals are a
great way to weave the PCs’ agency into the story.

SUCCESS AND FAILURE
Success at a reasonable long-term goal should be likely,
but not guaranteed. Give the player an expectation of how
likely their goal is to work out based on how ambitious it is.
Be clear about how much downtime it will take compared
to the amount of downtime you expect the party will get
during your campaign. Then let the player decide how to
commit their downtime, and to which tasks.
Repeated failures or outside problems could lead to the
whole goal failing. It happens! But give the player a fair
chance. Even if their goal is really hard to achieve—like
driving the undead out of Ustalav—they might find a way.
Don’t undermine their efforts or ideas, but do make clear
the magnitude of the task they’ve chosen. Remember that
even if a goal fails, the effort was worthwhile.
A failure or a success at a long-term goal can be a
major emotional beat for the character. They’ve changed
the world, after all! Don’t shortchange it just because it
happened in downtime. In fact, because it might have
taken place over multiple sessions, the player might have
been looking forward to the results for a really long time!

23

18833831

4121778

4121778


Gamemastery Guide

18833832

18833832

4121778

BUYING AND SELLING

The game leaves it up to you to determine what items the
PCs can and can’t purchase, and the final market Price for
them. Settlements the size of a town or bigger typically
have at least one vendor for basic, common gear, and even
magic and alchemical items of 1st level. Beyond that, it all
depends on how much you want to allow the players to
determine their abilities and how much verisimilitude you
want in your game. You can set the specifics where you
need, but let’s look at three possibilities.
PCs can buy what they want where they want. You
gloss over the details of markets. PCs can sell whatever
they want for half the Price and buy any item to which
they have access at full Price. This approach is focused on
expediency over verisimilitude and is likely to reduce the
number of unusual or distinctive items the PCs have, as
many players seek out the ones that most directly support
their characters’ strengths. This still means there’s a limit
on purchasing uncommon or rarer items, but you could
even do away with rarity if your group wants, or add a
surcharge instead (depending on your group’s play style,
that could be anywhere from 10% to 100% for uncommon
items, and 25% to 500% if you also want to open up all
rare items).
PCs can buy what they want but must put in additional
effort. If they want to sell or buy items, PCs must be in
a location where the markets can support that. They can

usually sell a single item for half its Price, but the Price
for something already plentiful on the market could drop
lower, typically to 25% or 10%, or be refused entirely if
there’s a glut. Buying an item usually costs the full Price;
buying higher-level items (or uncommon items if they’re
available at all) requires seeking out a special vendor or
NPC and can take extra time, representing a real investment
by the PCs. They might be unable to find the item at all
even after their time investment, based on the settlement’s
parameters. This approach allows PCs to determine some
of their items, but forces them to really work to get more
powerful items and discourages looting every enemy to sell
off fairly ordinary armor. This can be the most work for
you but can make the world feel diverse and complex.
Magical markets are rare or nonexistent. PCs get what
they find in adventures and can Craft their own items, if you
allow them to get formulas in some way. If you have magical
marketplaces at all, their selections are small. They sell items
at full Price and have difficulty attaining the funds to buy
more items. They might purchase items for half of the Price
but are far more selective about what they take. If you use
this approach, PCs are far more likely to use strange items
they find but might be dissatisfied or even underpowered
depending on what items you give them. Even in this style
of game, you might want to allow them to get weapons and
armor with fundamental runes fairly easily, or make sure
you award those on a regular basis.

24

18833832

4121779

4121779

18833833

18833833


Gamemastery Basics

TASKS AND EVENTS

Players will often look to you for tasks they might take
on during downtime, especially if they’re looking to Earn
Income. You should also interject special events to surprise
your players and add interesting scenes. If you need some
quick ideas for tasks characters might offer a PC, look at
the tables below for inspiration. The Earn Income tasks are
arranged with tasks appropriate for low-level PCs first, but
most can be adapted to the level you need. For the events,
you might need to “zoom out” to focus on a special scene
or even a short encounter or adventure.

TABLE 1–1: EARN INCOME TASKS
Academia, Library, Other Educational Lore
Work at a school or library
Compile information on a distant land for an expedition
Serve as administrator for a school or library
Acquire a rare book on dragons for a local noble
Crafting
Make tools for local farmers
Brew a crate of healing potions for a local church or hospital
Sew a dress for a noble’s debutante ball
Supply magical weapons for the palace guard corps
Engineering Lore
Assess the fortifications built to protect a town
Plan the mechanism for a drawbridge
Create schematics for a new mill
Food or Drink Lore
Brew simple ale or cook an ordinary dish for the local inn
Identify a dozen bottles of wine
Create a showpiece dish for an upcoming festival
Create a nine-course meal for a noble banquet
Genealogy Lore
Compile a family tree for a minor noble family
Determine next of kin to settle an inheritance dispute
Map the web of intermarriages of a sprawling royal family
Determine the lineages of an ancient civilization
Trace the lost heir of an ancient empire
Guild Lore
Recruit initiates for a guild
Identify symbols of an ancient guild in a tome
Consult on rearranging a guild’s hierarchy
Oversee the merger of two guilds or one guild splitting into two
Herbalism Lore
Supply poultices to a physician
Prepare herbs for a small restaurant
Identify the poisonous plant eaten by a local lord
Legal Lore
Clear some minor red tape
Defend someone charged with theft
Bring a corrupt noble to justice through the legal system
Find loopholes in a contract made with a devil
Mercantile Lore
Price a crate of imported textiles
Find the best trade route for a pirate crew to raid
Set exchange rates for a trade consortium

Mining Lore
Work a shift in a coal mine
Determine where a raw ingot was mined
Prospect to find a site for a new mine
Performance
Busk for townsfolk at a street fair
Play in the orchestra at an opera
Attend a society figure’s salon
Perform for visiting nobles
Impress a visiting maestro to bring glory to your hometown
Put on a performance for a patron from another plane
Politics Lore
Lobby for a vote or decision to go a certain way
Smear a noble to lower their station
Sailing Lore
Crew a ship on a short voyage
Render a ship in dry-dock seaworthy
Pilot a ship through monster-infested waters
Underworld Lore
Find out where a stolen item ended up
Get someone an audience with the head of a thieves’ guild
Smuggle a shipment of valuables out of the city
Warfare Lore
Teach a spear fighting class at a dojo
Instruct an officer in various military stratagems
Advise a general in planning a battlefield offensive

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

TABLE 1–2: DOWNTIME EVENTS

4121779

Craft or Earn Income (Crafting)
A shipment of important materials is delayed, and the PC
must find out why.
The PC creates a superlative work, which draws the
attention of a collector or museum.
The PC discovers a more efficient technique to work a
material and must decide to share it or keep it secret.
Create a Forgery (Society)
The format for paperwork the PC is attempting to mimic
gets changed, and they must adjust.
The paperwork is spoiled by a freak accident, such as a leaky
roof above the workshop or a clumsy assistant knocking
over beakers of chemicals.
A mysterious benefactor provides the PC with special tools
or a source document they didn’t have, but suggests they’ll
ask for a favor later to reciprocate.
Earn Income (General)
A fussy client demands multiple rounds of changes
throughout the process.
An accident at a work site puts someone in danger.
Something the PC is working on becomes a fad or hit—
demand skyrockets!
A visitor is impressed with the PC’s work and offers them a
more lucrative task in a distant location.
Conditions on the job site are abysmal, and other workers
ask the PC to join them in confronting the bosses.
The bosses or guildmasters are doing something illegal and
attempt to bribe the PC to look the other way.

25

18833833

4121780

4121780


Gamemastery Guide

The PC returns to their work one day to find someone has
tampered with what they’ve done.
Earn Income (Performance)
Due to the performance’s success, more shows are added,
running the PC ragged.
A competing show across town draws away customers.
A powerful noble finances a special performance but
demands some changes to the contents.
One of the PC’s fellow performers doesn’t show up, but the
show must go on!
Subsist (Survival)
Over a long time subsisting in a single area, the PC finds an
unknown berry or herb that could be useful for making a
new medicine.
The PC finds signs indicating some large creature has been
foraging as well—possibly a monster.
Buy and Sell Items
The PC sells an item of interest to members of a particular
group, who pursue the PC.
A merchant sells the PC a fraudulent item.
A shop the PCs frequent is in trouble and about to go out of
business without help.
Someone else offers a higher bid for an item a PC wants,
resulting in a negotiation or in the NPC offering a job the PC
must perform to claim the item.
Retrain
The PC sustains an injury in physical training.
Tapping into new magical powers inflicts a magical curse or
creates an odd phenomenon.
A retraining instructor falls ill or goes missing.
Someone witnesses the PC retraining and asks to join them
as they study or practice.
The PC’s training comes to a halt, and they need to acquire a
rare book or something similar to continue.

18833834

18833834

MONEY IN DOWNTIME

While the amount of money the PCs can earn during short
periods of downtime is significantly less than the value
of the loot they gain adventuring, it can still serve as a
satisfying bonus. The PCs might use their money to outfit
themselves better, donate it toward a good cause, or pool
it together to save for a major purchase. If you find that a
PC tends to forget about their money or save it up more
cautiously than they really need to, offer them rewarding
opportunities to spend it. For instance, they might be
approached to contribute to a charity in desperate need or
sponsor an artist looking for a patron.
The downtime system includes a guide for calculating
the cost of living, using the values found in the Core
Rulebook on page 294. Tracking cost of living is usually
best reserved for months or years of downtime since
that’s when someone might earn a substantial amount
of money from downtime activities and find that costs
really add up. You can usually ignore it if there are only
a few days of downtime, though if a PC is roleplaying
a fine or extravagant lifestyle, you might charge them

during even short periods of downtime to reinforce the
story they’re telling.

INVESTMENTS
The downtime system isn’t meant to deal with investing
money, receiving interest, or the like just to make more
money. Rather, investing should result in changes in the
world. PCs might invest in founding a museum, and find
on their return that the collection has grown. If they fund
an expedition, they might get access to interesting trade
goods later on.
When characters are investing in a major endeavor,
the amount of in-world time invested often matters
more than the money. While spending additional money
greatly increases the efficiency of Crafting an item, you
can’t build a fort in a day just because you have enough
money to pay for the whole process. Downtime is a good
opportunity for characters to start long processes that
can continue in the background as the PCs adventure,
provided they can find a trustworthy, competent person
to run things in their stead.

MONEY DURING LONG PERIODS OF DOWNTIME
If the PCs have a very long time between adventures,
especially years, they have the opportunity to collect a
great deal of money through downtime. Use the guidelines
for average progress and cost of living on pages 501–502
of the Core Rulebook to figure out how much they get.
Because you’re trying to convey that a long time has
passed, have them spend it before you jump to the end
of downtime. What did they invest in during those years?
What drew their interest? Did their fortunes rise or fall?
Did they acquire interesting objects or hire compelling
people? Consider this expenditure another way to show
how the PCs impact the world.

4121780

RETRAINING

The rules and suggestions for retraining are covered
thoroughly in the Core Rulebook on page 502. Your
primary responsibility here is to determine the time,
instruction, and costs of retraining, as well as adjusting
details to align cohesively with the story and world.
Consider what effort each PC puts forth as they retrain,
so you can describe how they feel their abilities change.
What kind of research and practice do they do? If they
have a teacher, what advice does that teacher give?
You can run a campaign without retraining if you
want the PCs to be more bound by their decisions or
are running a game without downtime. However, if your
campaign doesn’t use downtime rules but a player really
regrets a decision made while building or leveling up their
character, you might make an exception for them.

TEACHERS
Most of the abilities PCs gain come through adventuring.
They’re learning on the job! Retraining, on the other

26

18833834

4121781

4121781

18833835

18833835


Gamemastery Basics

hand, is dedicated study that might require a teacher’s
help. You don’t have to use teachers, but it gives you
a great way to introduce a new NPC or bring back an
existing one in a new role. The role of a teacher could
also be filled by communing with nature for a druid,
poring through a massive grimoire for a wizard, and so
on. The important part is the guidance gained from that
source. The following list includes sample teachers.
• Archwizard Koda Mohanz, wizard academy proctor
• Bagra Redforge, aged artisan
• Baroness Ivestia II, tutor in etiquette and social
maneuvering
• Byren Effestos, Esquire, advisor in matters of law,
politics, and finance
• Dr. Phinella Albor, professor of medicine and surgery
• Dr. Revis Enzerrad, mystic versed in the occult
• Grita the Swamp Sage, purveyor of strange draughts
and cryptic riddles
• Jeballewn Leastfire, tutor in alchemical experimentation
• Kpunde Neverlost, retired veteran adventurer
• Lyra, teller of legends and master of handicrafts
• Major Venaeus, instructor of military tactics
• Mother Elizia, high priest and religious scholar
• Professor Kurid Yamarrupan, senior university lector
• Quintari Solvar, coach for fitness and healthy living
• Ragged Sanden, hermit and speaker for nature
• Silent Flame, Master of the Seventeen Forms
• Tembly the Daring, veteran acrobat and circus
performer
• Twelve Fingers, experienced thief and spy
• Wen Hardfoot, well-traveled scout and naturalist
• Zuleri Gan, conductor, playwright, and music scholar

rare magic, or the intervention of a deity. For instance,
you might require an elf who wants to be a halfling to
first become trained in Halfling Lore, worship the halfling
pantheon, and eventually do a great service for halflings to
get a divine blessing of transformation.
Retraining a background requires altering the game’s
story so that the events the PC thought happened didn’t.
That can be pretty tricky to justify! The most likely
scenario is that they had their memory altered and
need to get it magically restored to reveal their “true”
background—the new retrained background.
Of course, in all these cases you could make an
exception and just let the player make the change without
explanation. This effectively acknowledges that you’re
playing a game, and don’t need an in-world justification
for certain changes. For some groups it might be easier,
or require less suspension of disbelief, to ask
the group to adjust their ideas of what’s
previously happened in the game than to
accept something like an elf turning into a
halfling via magic.

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121781

EXTREME RETRAINING
By the default rules, PCs can’t retrain their class,
ancestry, background, ability boosts, or anything else
intrinsic to their character. However, you might be able
to find a way to make this happen in the story, going
beyond the realm of retraining and into deeper, storybased quests. Class and ability modifiers are the simplest
of these to justify, as they could come about solely through
intense retraining. Especially at low levels, you might let a
player rebuild their character as a different class, perhaps
starting by retraining into a multiclass dedication for
their new class and swapping into more feats from that
dedication as partial progress towards the class change.
Just be mindful that they aren’t swapping over to switch
out a class they think is great at low levels for one
they think is stronger at high levels. Retraining
a class or ability scores should take a long time,
typically months or years.
Changing an ancestry or heritage
requires some kind of magic, such as
reincarnation into a new form.
This might take a complex
ritual, exposure to bizarre and

27

18833835

4121782

4121782


Gamemastery Guide

ADJUDICATING RULES

As Game Master, it falls on you to adjudicate the rules. This means you’re making judgments
and decisions about the rules, especially when their application is unclear. Roleplaying
games encourage creativity, and however well crafted and well tested a set of rules is,
players will always find situations that require interpretation and judgment by the GM.
You need at least some familiarity with the rules to run
a game well. But you don’t need to be the foremost
expert on the rules. You don’t even need to know the
most about the rules at your table to be a great GM!
There’s a key difference between “knowing” the rules and
“adjudicating” the rules.
While GMing, strive to make quick,
fair, and consistent rulings. Your rulings
should encourage your group to work
together to interpret the rules and to be
creative with their characters’ decisions
and actions. If your group is satisfied
with the interpretation, you’ve made
the right adjudication!

CORE PRINCIPLES

These are the most important things to keep
in mind.
• Remember the basics of the rules.
• Be consistent with your past rulings.
• Don’t worry if you don’t have a
specific rule memorized; it’s OK to
look it up!
• Listen to concise opinions from the
other players.
• Make a call and get on with play.
• Review your decision after the
session is over, if necessary.

18833836

18833836

THE BASICS
Start by looking at the basic guidelines on
page 491 of the Core Rulebook for the
fundamental principles that can help
you make rulings quickly and fairly. You
should also be familiar with the rules relevant
to encounters, exploration, and downtime, as
well as with the section in Chapter 10: Game
Mastering in the Core Rulebook on running
those modes of play.

CONSISTENCY AND FAIRNESS
As an arbiter of the rules and the person who’s setting the
scene for the action, it’s in your best interest to appear
fair at all times. Your main defense against appearing
unfair is consistency in your rulings.
Achieving consistency is as easy as explaining why
you’re ruling a certain way and comparing this ruling to
past rulings you’ve made in a way that makes sense to

your players. For example, you might say something like
“When Torben swung from the chandelier and attacked
the air elemental, I required an Athletics check as part
of the action and gave a +1 circumstance bonus to the
attack roll. Hanging from the rope bridge to attack the
giant bat sounds similar, so why don’t you
roll an Athletics check.” Do this any time it’s
applicable when you make a ruling, but don’t
feel compelled to do so for truly new rulings.
Through the course of playing, your previous
rulings will form a set of shared preferences
and an understanding between you and your
group—or even become formalized house rules.
Over time, your players will think about these
examples when planning their actions, which
can improve consistency during play.

LOOKING UP RULES
It is perfectly acceptable to refer to the rules during
a session. However, you don’t have to do this alone.
If you’re leafing through a book or searching an
electronic reference, your players are idle. There
are a few techniques that make these intervals
more palatable for the players. Letting them know
that you’re looking something up might prompt
some players to also read the rule. This can increase
the chances of collaboration and sets expectations
for the length of the pause. Alerting your players
that you’re going to take a minute and read
the rules also lets them know that it’s a good
time to tend to away‑from-the-table tasks like
refilling a drink.

4121782

LISTEN TO THE PLAYERS
The friends around your game table are
perhaps your best tool for achieving quick, fair,
and consistent rulings. Sharing the task of remembering
the rules makes rules discussions collaborative rather
than combative, greatly increases the chances of accurate
and comprehensive recall of the written rules and your
own past rulings, and is true to the shared storytelling
spirit of Pathfinder.
Asking if anyone knows how a specific rule rewards
those players who have spent time mastering the rules and
involves more people in the discussion. It signals to other
players that you are willing to hear opinions before making
a ruling, and it builds a more collaborative environment.
In addition, for groups with access to a large number

28

18833836

4121783

4121783

18833837

18833837


Gamemastery Basics

of sourcebooks or rules resources, you can ask different
players to examine separate sources. This can greatly
increase the speed and accuracy of a group’s rulings.
Approaching the rules as a group problem also means
that you should never trivialize player concerns about a
rule. You must also think about each player and assess how
important the rules actually are to each player. Remember,
though—while rules recall is a group challenge, making
the final decision on the rules interpretation and getting
the session moving again falls to you.

MAKE THE CALL
Though all the above are great practices for making
good rulings, often the best ruling is the one that keeps
the game moving. Avoid getting so bogged down that
it takes you several minutes to decide what ruling
you’ll proceed with. Take what’s close enough and keep
playing. If necessary, you can tell your group “This is how
we’re playing it now, but we can have more discussion
between sessions.” This gets you back in the action, puts
a clear stamp on the fact that this is your decision in the
moment, and empowers your players with permission
to express their opinions on the ruling at a later time.
When in doubt, rule in favor of the player’s request, and
then review the situation later.
The best time to really go in-depth, possibly putting the
group on a short break, is when a situation is life-or-death
or has major consequences in a character’s story.

TAKE TIME FOR REVIEW
When you make a decision you’re not sure about, look
back over it at the end of a session or between sessions.
You might change your mind—there’s nothing wrong
with that! If you change or clarify your original ruling,
inform your players before the next session. No one likes
being surprised by a rule change. Even better, include
them in a rules conversation just like you might during
a session. The guidance on discussing rules with your
players still applies between sessions. Unlike at-the-table
rules discussions, there’s also much more time in these
situations to read existing official rulings or sources.

SAYING “YES, BUT”

Some of the most memorable moments come from
situations that inherently call for a rules interpretation,
like when a player wants to do something creative using
the environment. The variety of these situations is limited
only by the imagination of your players. It’s usually better
to say “yes” than “no,” within reason. For example,
imagine a player wants to do something borderline
nonsensical like grabbing a spider and squeezing it to
force it to use its web attack. But what about a player
who wants to use a fire spell to deliberately ignite a barrel
of oil? Surely that should have some effect!
This is where you can use a variant of the well-known
improv “Yes, and,” technique: you can say “Yes, but.”

With “Yes, but,” you allow the player’s creative idea,
but tie it into the world and the game rules via some
sort of additional consequences, potentially adding the
uncertainty of an additional roll.
Here are some simple ways you might implement this
tool. Almost all of these require an action or are part of
another action.
• Get a fleeting benefit without a roll. Example: dip a
sword into a burning brazier to add 1 fire damage on
the next attack against a troll.
• Require a check, then apply a circumstance bonus to
the PC’s action. Example: swing from a chandelier
above a foe.
• Require a check, then apply a circumstance penalty
or condition to a foe. Example: throw a barrel over
a monster’s head.
• Require an attack roll or skill check to deal minor
damage and gain another benefit. Examples: jump
from a higher elevation down onto a foe for a small
amount of damage, potentially knocking the foe
prone; throw sand in an opponent’s eyes.
• Require a directed attack against an object, then
allow foes to attempt saving throws against the
object’s effect at a DC you choose. Example: cast a
produce flame spell at a barrel of explosives.
Another powerful tool you can use to help you say “Yes,
but” when you’re unsure of the game impact is to allow the
idea to work just this once, letting your players know that
this is part of your decision. For instance, maybe you think
a PCs attempt to Grapple a spider to aim its web attack at
another foe is so fun you have to let them do it, but you’re
worried that the effect would be so powerful that the PCs
would just carry around a spider to shoot webs for the rest
of the campaign. By making it a one-time effect, you can
have fun but don’t have to worry about whether you’re
setting a disruptive precedent for later on.

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121783

HOUSE RULES

You and your players will inevitably come across a rule
you disagree with, or that runs counter to the theme of
your game. You might even decide to add a specific rule
to an area not covered by the written rules. Collectively,
these rulings, changes, and additions are known as house
rules. It’s a good idea to record them in a place where the
group can easily access and refer to them, and where a
potential new player could find them. Such record‑keeping
is a great thing to delegate to a player!
The best rule of thumb in these situations is to be
slow to change the written rules and quick to revert a
problematic ruling or house rule. The simple reason
for this is that sticking to the written rules is the easiest
way to remain fair and consistent. However, the more
you learn your group’s play style, the more often you’ll
find times where you and your group feel it’s correct to
institute a house rule of some sort. You might take a look
at Chapter 4: Variant Rules to get started!

29

18833837

4121784

4121784


Gamemastery Guide

RESOLVING PROBLEMS

Being a Game Master and running a game can be a tremendously rewarding and fulfilling
experience: you get to sit down with friends old and new, roll some dice, tell stories, and have
fun. That said, being a GM and running a game can present unique challenges. Sometimes
problems present themselves at the table, and it’s up to the GM to resolve them.
When dealing with problems at the table, keep in mind
the primary reason to play Pathfinder is to have fun. And
that’s true for everyone—player or GM. Don’t “solve” a
problem by reducing everyone’s enjoyment of the game
or their ability to forge a path for their characters. Of
course, sometimes your solution might not make everyone
deliriously happy. Play style is a highly personal, individual

TOTAL PARTY KILLS

Perhaps the most feared of any outcome of a
gaming session, a total party kill (TPK) can spell
the end of an adventure or campaign. In a TPK,
every member of the party dies. Think in advance
about how comfortable you are with TPKs and discuss
them with the other players. This can provide
valuable insights into not only how you
should handle one but also the implied
level of lethality the players expect.
TPKs are rarely unavoidable. Usually
it becomes evident at some point during the session,
whether to everyone or only to you, that disaster looms.
What the players do with this insight is up to them, but
you have more control and can take steps to avoid the
TPK. For example, perhaps the PCs’ foe gets distracted
by something, an ally arrives to help the heroes, or the
villain captures them instead of slaying them outright. The
simplest path is to just allow a clear escape route the PCs
can take—perhaps with a few characters still falling along
the way. It’s not entirely your responsibility to defuse the
TPK, but offering such opportunities gives players more
say in their characters’ fates.
Should a TPK occur anyway, the kind of game you’re
running should influence your approach to the situation.
For example, in a campaign centered around dungeon
crawling, a TPK is less of a problem—the players simply
form a new adventuring party and take up where the dead
ones left off. If you are running a story-intensive game
in which each PC has a personal stake in defeating the
villain, saving the town, or the like, a TPK could demolish
multiple plot threads. Here, you might use the story you
have in place, having the NPCs take up arms to find or
avenge the slain group—or raise them from the dead.
Note that the game should continue only if the players
want it to. The premature end of an adventure or campaign

18833838

18833838

thing, rarely does a group agree on all things all the time.
Solving problems can be as collaborative as the rest of the
game. Only a foolish GM ignores the players’ opinions—
but that said, the final decision in resolving a problem rests
with you.
Issues at the table arise occasionally. Broadly, such
problems can be separated into four main categories:
distractions, total party kills, problematic players, and
power imbalances. The first of these is covered in detail
on page 491 of the Core Rulebook, and guidance for the
others appears here.

4121784

30

18833838

4121785

4121785

18833839

18833839


Gamemastery Basics

isn’t always a bad thing. If the group is interested in moving
on, there’s nothing wrong with ending the campaign and
starting something different.

PROBLEMATIC PLAYERS

Most players who cause problems do so unintentionally—
perhaps bringing out-of-game issues and stresses to the
table. You shouldn’t immediately jump on every instance
of problematic play—everyone has a bad night on
occasion. However, if someone disrupts the game on an
ongoing basis, you owe it to all the players to deal with
the problem. If you don’t, bad feelings, grudges, and even
ruined friendships could result.
Handling a problematic player requires tact: making
demands in front of the rest of the group is rarely the
best way to resolve the problem. Attempt to handle the
problem privately away from the game, or call a break to
have a private conversation if the situation is really urgent.
As with all emotionally charged conversations, email, text
messages and the like can lose the subtlety of speech—it’s
better to meet the player face to face, if possible.
Here are some problematic behaviors that often come
up and might require you to intervene.
• Obsessing over the letter of the rules.
• Constantly “helping” other players make the optimal
choice on their turn.
• Making their character the center of attention,
without allowing space for other players.
Other behaviors are unacceptable and must be dealt
with firmly and decisively. These can be severe enough to
pause the game in progress. Such actions speak to a deeper
problem and require more drastic action to solve.
• Repeatedly arguing with decisions made by other
players or the GM.
• Ignoring other players’ opinions.
• Deliberately derailing the adventure’s plot.
• Being deliberately rude or cruel to other players—
especially if it’s on the basis of their ethnicity, gender,
sexual orientation, political or religious affiliation, the
color of their skin, or the like.

SAFETY TOOLS
Introducing and using safety tools at your table can help
head off some problematic behaviors. The X-Card and
Lines and Veils tools described on page 485 of the Core
Rulebook allow anyone who feels uncomfortable or
unsafe to express their discomfort, with clear guidance
on how the rest of the table should respond. This clarity
sets obvious boundaries to help enforce the social rules
of the table.

EJECTING A PLAYER
Ultimately, there is no place for a serially or deliberately
disruptive player in your gaming group. Such behavior is
not fair to you or the other players, and the problem player
needs to either modify their behavior or leave the group.

CHEATING
Players rarely cheat knowingly, so if you suspect a player of
cheating, it’s safe to assume first that they’re unaware of—or
simply forgot—how an aspect of the rules works. A gentle
reminder of how the rule, spell, or ability in question functions
is usually enough to move past the situation. Every once in
a great while, you’ll encounter a player who is deliberately
cheating. The spirit of roleplaying is one of cooperative
storytelling and overcoming challenges together, so one
player cheating steals fun from every other player at the
table. It’s natural to feel some anger in this situation, so make
sure you let some time pass between when you discover that
a player is cheating and when you address it with them.
Ultimately, it will fall to you as the GM to gently make
it clear that this behavior must stop. To do this well,
think carefully about why the player is cheating before
approaching them. The reason behind the cheating often
points to a reasonable solution. When discussing the matter
with your player, do your best to remain calm and inquisitive
rather than accusatory.

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

Before meeting with the problem player, discuss the
situation with the other players in private to ensure you
make the right call, and figure out what repercussions you
expect and whether the game should continue at all.
When you break the news to the problem player, be
compassionate but firmly state the decision is final and
restate which behaviors are responsible. If parts of having
the player in the game were rewarding or you want the
player to remain a friend, make that clear and decide if a
player’s behavior merits other changes to your relationship.

4121785

POWER IMBALANCES

You might end up with one PC who outshines everyone else.
Perhaps the player is a rules expert with a powerful character,
other players are less experienced or more focused on the
story of their characters, or there’s just a rules combination
or item that’s stronger than you expected. In any case, this
imbalance might mean you have other players who feel
ineffective, or the overpowered character’s player becomes
bored because they aren’t challenged during gameplay.
Talk to the player between sessions, and make it clear
that no one at the table is to blame in this situation. Most
players have no problem making some concessions for the
happiness of the group. If the problem results from rules
options, offer an easy way to retrain. If the imbalance
resulted from an item, come up with a way that item might
need to be lost or sacrificed, but in a satisfying way that
furthers the narrative.
If you meet resistance from the player, listen to their
counterpoints. If you’re still convinced they need to
change, you might need to be more firm.
It’s worth stating that players might still have fun, or even
enjoy an instance of power imbalance. You don’t have to do
anything to address it unless it limits fun at your table.

31

18833839

4121786

4121786


Gamemastery Guide

NARRATIVE COLLABORATION

The relationship between you, your players, and the story is what makes roleplaying games
successful and memorable. If all the players at the table contribute ideas, the game holds
more surprises for everyone—including you!
While some players like to sit back and let the Game
Master control everything, most players want their
contributions to shape the campaign’s story. This is central
to the concept of player agency—making players feel like
the choices they make really matter, and that the world is
a living place they can change through their decisions. In
some games, the players can step beyond the traditional
divide between GM and players to directly influence how
the story progresses. Below are three methods you can use
to balance the narrative control of your game.

IDEA FARM

Coming up with ideas for a campaign can sometimes feel
overwhelming. This is where your players come in handy!
You can solicit direct feedback from them and implement
their ideas into the game. This style of narrative control
preserve your authority over the game while giving players
the chance to incorporate elements into the game you know
they want to see. It doesn’t venture beyond the traditional
structure of a fantasy roleplaying game.
Plan for a few checkpoints throughout the campaign
where you touch base with your players to get their ideas. The
most crucial comes at the start of the game. It’s best to take
this step before you even set to work on crafting the world
or plot, so that player input can define what’s important in
the game world. Later, checkpoints can coincide with major
story milestones. For example, if the players set off across
the sea, you might ask where they want their voyage to end
and what sites, if any, they’d like to explore along the way.

18833840

18833840

CREATIVE
COLLABORATION

You might have players develop the stories of some of the
regions or NPCs, while your contributions serve as the
glue that makes it all work together. This breaks somewhat
with traditional RPG structures, in that you might not be
the expert on all areas of the setting and plot.
Your collaboration will depend on the interests of you
and the other players. Maybe one draws a city map, another
makes the stats and personality for an NPC, another
controls some monsters in combat, and a fourth doesn’t
want to do anything beyond playing their character. There’s
a trade-off here, because while you’ll be off-loading some
of your work, you’ll also need to ensure consistency across
these multiple sources of ideas. It can really help to keep a
log of which player is in charge of each part of your setting.
If you expect one of a player’s specialties to appear in an
upcoming session, let them know ahead of time so they can
prepare or discuss their ideas in advance with you.

DECENTRALIZED
STORYTELLING

So what if you want to go all the way and completely
break down the walls between the GM and other players?
What if you want to preside over a game in which anyone
can speak for any of the NPCs, and when someone tries
to determine what’s down the next hallway, it’s just as
likely to come from another player as from you? Now
we’re talking about decentralized storytelling, the least
traditional approach we’ll cover here.
In this approach, one of your biggest jobs is asking
questions or giving prompts. “When you open the door,
what’s beyond?”“How does the king react to Lem’s taunt?”
You can direct your questions to individual players, leave
them open to all, and put forth your own suggestions.
This approach works best when players are comfortable
with one another and willing to both take responsibility in
building the story and accept that some of their ideas will
go unused. It’s well suited for shorter campaigns, or ones
in which players take turns in the GM’s seat.

4121786

CHALLENGES

The largest risk of putting narrative control in multiple
people’s hands is losing a cohesive story. When multiple
people have conflicting ideas about the tone of the game or
particulars of the setting, you can end up with something
that doesn’t satisfy anyone. One of your tasks as GM is to
recap events to clarify and reinforce the shared narrative.
Shared narrative control also complicates planning
ahead. The group might need to improvise an encounter,
take a break while you (and maybe other players) prep to
go in a new direction, or even revise their plans. It helps to
limit yourself to creatures that you can quickly find stats for
in a Bestiary volume or in the NPC Gallery of this book to
avoid spending hours of work on creatures you won’t use.
Also, don’t lose sight of your own enjoyment! You
shouldn’t sacrifice how much fun you have for others.

STORY POINTS

If you prefer, you can give players a number of Story
Points at the start of each session (typically 2 or 3). They
can cash these in to determine what happens next in the
story. Having a currency like this means you can keep your
steady hand on the tiller while allowing other players to
interject when it’s important to them. For most groups, a
Story Point should allow the player to suggest a plot twist
that can be resolved quickly, or to establish a relevant fact
or NPC attitude. It can’t determine the outcome of an
entire scene or vastly alter the reality of the setting.

32

18833840

4121787

4121787

18833841

18833841


Gamemastery Basics

SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES

No two Pathfinder groups are exactly the same. At each gaming table, the GM and players
work together to find their own style for the game and to tell their own stories. Some of
these differences require the GM to make adjustments, especially for groups participating
in Pathfinder Society Organized Play, large or small groups, and groups in which one or
more players has needs that are not addressed directly in the Core Rulebook.

PATHFINDER SOCIETY
ORGANIZED PLAY

The Pathfinder Society Organized Play campaign is a
thriving, worldwide organization of players and GMs.
While most home campaigns provide long-running
stories with a consistent group, Pathfinder Society
provides adventures designed to be completed in a
single game session, so that players can continue their
characters’ stories whenever and wherever works best
for them. To allow this flexibility while maintaining a
fair experience, the Pathfinder Society campaign handles
some tasks that are normally in the GM’s purview,
such as selecting which rules options are available to
PCs. Pathfinder Society GMs are expected to stay true
to the adventure as it is written but are encouraged
to allow players to apply creative solutions to the
situations they face. For example, PCs may be able
to use illusions, bribery, or social skills to bypass a
challenge that is presented in the scenario as a combat
encounter. You can decide for yourself which alternative
solutions seem reasonable based on the context of the
adventure, consulting the Difficulty Classes section on
page 503 of the Core Rulebook to set appropriate DCs
for challenges. For more about playing, running, and
organizing games for Pathfinder Society Organized Play,
visit PathfinderSociety.club.

UNUSUAL GROUP SIZES

The standard group size for Pathfinder assumes four
players and a GM. Page 489 of the Core Rulebook gives
instructions for how to adjust for other group sizes, but
additional changes may be helpful.

SMALL GROUPS
Small-group games focus more intently on the interests
of the players and their characters, allowing for an
experience that can be more customizable for each
individual. However, they can also run into trouble when
the PCs have gaps in their abilities. In many cases, the
easiest way to adjust for a small group is to add additional
characters. This could come in the form of allowing each
player to play two characters or adding hirelings and
support NPCs to the party to shore up roles that the
PCs don’t fill. When adding GM-controlled NPCs to the
party, it’s important to be sure that the PCs remain the
stars of the show. In general, GM-controlled characters

shouldn’t make major decisions, and they shouldn’t
outshine PCs at their primary skills or roles (see page 9
for more information about GM-controlled NPCs). You
can also use variant rules like dual-class characters (page
192), free archetypes (page 194), or even just a few extra
trained skills to help improve the PCs’ overall flexibility.
If you don’t add additional characters to the party
or modify the PCs, it’s a good idea to tailor challenges
and storylines to their abilities as well as player interest.
For example, if you have two players, a rogue and a
bard, a heist could be a good fit. In combats, carefully
consider how the PCs will fare against each opponent.
Some monsters are particularly likely to incapacitate a
single PC; in small groups, use such creatures carefully
and consider raising the encounter difficulty and XP
awards beyond what a creature of that level is normally
worth. Meanwhile, creatures that depend on affecting
or damaging large numbers of PCs at once might be
less effective.

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121787

LARGE GROUPS
Large-group games bring together the creativity and
enthusiasm of many players, and they lend themselves to
combat at a grand scale. However, they also divide the
GM’s attention. Large groups also need to set ground
rules for how many players need to be present for the
game to run when some players are missing. Recaps at the
beginning of each session are crucial to keep everyone on
the same page. Delegation is one of your most powerful
tools to keep the session running smoothly. For example,
you can put the players in charge of recapping the events
from the previous session, handling initiative, managing
the party’s treasury, looking up rules, or helping with
accessories like props and music. (For information on
even greater degrees of player delegation, check out page
32.) Also consider which tasks really need to be taken
care of while everyone is there. For example, you could
ask your players to handle selling items, deciding which
common items they want to buy, and leveling up between
sessions instead of at the table.
Each additional player adds to the length of combat
twice: once for their own turn, and once for the additional
foes on the field. By encouraging players to pay attention
to the battle when it isn’t their turn and to plan their
actions as their turn approaches, you can shorten each
player’s turn and keep the battle moving swiftly.

33

18833841

4121788

4121788


Gamemastery Guide

18833842

18833842

4121788

Inevitably, there will be situations and circumstances
that don’t involve the whole group. In a sufficiently large
group, splitting the party is not necessarily dangerous. If
the party splits up for more than a short stint, you can
call for separate sessions to determine what happens to
the two halves of the group, allowing them to reunite and
share their findings afterward. Whether or not the party
splits, having more players means less active time for each
character. Look for opportunities to highlight each PC by
providing challenges that play to their strengths or tie in
story elements to which they are particularly connected.

PLAYER NEEDS

Sometimes, making your game accessible and fun for
everyone at the table requires making some adjustments
to your typical GMing style or setup. The first step is open
communication so you can learn what the players need,
what accommodations would be helpful, and what type of
assistance players do and don’t want to receive.

SENSORY DIFFERENCES
Players may have differences in the way that they process
sensory information, as well as which senses they use.
For players who are hard of hearing or who struggle to
process large amounts of sensory information at once,
selecting a quiet gaming venue and establishing ground
rules about table talk (such as asking players not to

interrupt each other) can make the game more accessible.
Such players can also often benefit from handouts they
can consult during the session. Keep in mind the way your
players perceive the world when describing locations.
For example, if you have a blind or visually impaired
player at the table, instead of simply describing what a
location looks like, describe how it sounds and smells,
the temperature of the room, the feeling of the breeze,
and other aspects of the scene that they can identify with.

ATTENTION SPAN
It’s not uncommon for people to struggle to maintain
their attention for hours on end, especially for young
players. If keeping attention is an issue at your table,
add breaks to the game. Whether you’re just taking
a break to stretch and chat or enjoying a full meal in
the middle of the game, switching up the context helps
players refresh their focus. Some players remain more
engaged if they have something else to do while playing,
such as doodling or pacing. Maintaining attention
can be particularly challenging for some players when
their character is not engaged, such as when the party
splits or when they have just finished their turn in a
large combat. You can allow players to engage in other
activities during the session, such as texting, reading, or
playing other games, and then draw them back into the
game when their character is active.

34

18833842

4121789

4121789

18833843

18833843


Gamemastery Basics

RARITY IN YOUR GAME

The rarity system is a powerful tool that helps you and your group customize your story,
your characters, and your world to better match your game’s themes and setting. You can
also use it to keep the complexity of your game low by limiting access to unusual options.
This section supplements the Using Rarity and Access
sidebar on page 488 of the Core Rulebook.

THE FOUR RARITIES

Let’s first review the default usage for the four
rarities in the game and how these already start to
tell a story about your world.
• Common elements are prevalent enough, at
least among adventurers, that a player is assumed
to be able to access them provided they meet the
prerequisites (if any).
• Uncommon elements are difficult to access, but a PC
can usually find them eventually with enough effort,
potentially by choosing a specific character option or
spending substantial downtime tracking them down.
• Rare elements are lost secrets, ancient magic,
and other options that PCs can access only if
you specifically make them available.
• Unique elements are one of a kind. You
have full control over whether PCs can access
them. Named NPCs are unique creatures,
though that doesn’t mean their base creature
type is unique. For instance, an orc named
Graytusk is unique, but that doesn’t
mean it would be any harder for a PC
encountering her to tell she’s an orc—just to
discern specific information about her.

DIFFERENT CONTEXTS

Just because something is common or uncommon in
one context doesn’t necessarily mean it’s the same in
others. This is specifically true when comparing the
commonality of a creature and an ancestry. For instance,
while hobgoblins are a relatively common monster for
adventurers to encounter and are a common creature, in
most settings they are still far less prevalent than humans
or elves and would be an uncommon ancestry.
Because uncommon elements are available in certain
circumstances, it often varies by locale, even within the
same setting. For instance, a katana is uncommon in the
Core Rulebook and in the Inner Sea region of Golarion,
but in Asian fantasy–inspired Tian Xia, a katana would be
common and some western weapons might be uncommon.
Similarly, in an elven kingdom, uncommon elven weapons
like the elven curve blade might be common.

ACCESS ENTRIES
Uncommon elements sometimes have an Access entry in
their stat block. A character who meets the specifications

listed there has access to that option just like they would
to a common option, even though it’s uncommon. These
entries include a statement such as “follower of Shelyn,”
“member of the Pathfinder Society,” or “from Absalom.”

STARTING ELEMENTS

Elements like ancestries, backgrounds, classes, and
heritages that a character must select at character
creation can still be uncommon or rare. Obviously,
there’s no opportunity for the character to search
for them during play, but these rarities still indicate
the prevalence of adventurers with those elements
in the world. You can decide to allow them on a
case-by-case basis depending on the campaign and
the story your group wants to tell. For instance, a
game set in the lizardfolk empire of Droon might
have lizardfolk (normally uncommon) as a common
ancestry while the typical common ancestries are less
common. An official player’s guide for a Pathfinder
Adventure Path might have uncommon backgrounds
that you can access by playing the Adventure Path.

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121789

STORYTELLING

You might craft a quest involving an uncommon or rare
subject. For instance, players might encounter a door that
requires a rare spell to open, and need to travel to an
academy to learn it. If a player has their heart set on an
option that’s not common, look for ways to build a story
in which their character acquires that option.

WORLDBUILDING

With the rarities at your fingertips, you and your group can
start building a unique world using rarity as a tool. Imagine
a world where one or more of the core classes are rare.
Maybe the gods rarely answer the call of the faithful and
a PC cleric is one of the only clerics in the world. Perhaps
sorcerers are rare and feared by wizards’ guilds, which have
a stranglehold on spell access. For a grittier feel, you could
make abilities that can remove afflictions uncommon or
rare. You could even create a low‑magic setting where all
magic and magic items are uncommon or rare.
You can add, remove, or alter Access entries to fit your
world. For instance, if in your world the goddess of death
guards the secrets of resurrection, you might add an
Access entry to raise dead and resurrection for characters
who worship that goddess.
These are just a few ideas to help get you started. The
number of ways you can vary rarities to adjust your
setting, story, and game are nearly unlimited.

35

18833843

4121790

4121790


Gamemastery Guide

CAMPAIGN STRUCTURE

Each adventure presents one contained story, but your campaign tells a more expansive
one. Think of each adventure like an episode or arc and the campaign as a whole series.
Though each adventure might tell a vastly different story, they should all tie into the
themes and characters that stretch across the whole campaign.

A campaign interweaves multiple stories: the events of
each adventure, the personal triumphs and failures of
each PC, and the stories of NPCs who appear throughout.
That means a campaign can become more than the sum
of its parts. When you start out, you’ll likely have a core
structure in mind for your campaign, but through play it
can—and should—grow and evolve.

BASIC STRUCTURES

When building your campaign, you can use these structures
as a starting point. The Adventure Design section explains
various styles of adventures on pages 41–43 that, after
creating your basic campaign structure, can be used to
inspire the creation of the adventures in your campaign.

ONE-SHOT
An adventure lasting one session, a one-shot works well for a
highly themed adventure using characters or concepts that are
novel, but that players might not want to stick with long-term.
Adventures 1, typically a dungeon crawl, horror, intrigue, or
mystery
Top Level 1, but often starts at a higher level
Time Frame 1 session

18833844

18833844

BRIEF CAMPAIGN
This structure is meant for a brief, self-contained campaign. It
can be ideal for introducing new players to Pathfinder, and can
be extended to a longer campaign if the group wishes.
Adventures 2, typically one dungeon crawl followed by one high
adventure; this format also works well for horror adventures
Top Level 4–5
Time Frame 3 months weekly, 6 months biweekly

EXTENDED CAMPAIGN
An extended campaign works well for a dedicated group that
might want to switch to a new campaign or a different game
after a year or so. It allows for significant character and plot
development but doesn’t reach the higher levels of the game.
Adventures 5, typically with multiple adventures fitting the
main theme of the campaign (such as high adventure or
gritty adventure), with other adventure styles for variety.
Top Level 11–13
Time Frame 1 year weekly, 1-1/2 years biweekly

EPIC CAMPAIGN
An ambitious and complex game, the epic campaign takes PCs
all the way to level 20, pitting them against the greatest threats

in the world and beyond. This can be challenging in terms of
time commitment and complexity, but it lets PCs develop into
true legends, and the players will likely remember it for years.
Adventures 6 long adventures, typically starting with high
adventure or a dungeon crawl and including military
adventure, planar adventure, and romantic adventure
Top Level 20
Time Frame 1-1/2 years weekly, 3 years biweekly

LINKING ADVENTURES

In a campaign that includes multiple adventures, a smooth
transition from one adventure to the next ties the story
together. You might use NPCs who could appear in both
adventures, a treasure or clue found in one adventure
that becomes important in a later one, or even fallout
from one adventure that causes the next adventure to
take place. Related locations can help, too. Adventures
that take place in neighboring regions, or both in the
same region, have an inherent link. If they take place in
two different places, you’ll need a reason the PCs should
travel between the two, and you can use this journey as a
short, interstitial adventure.

4121790

ADVENTURE THEMES
Consider how each adventure’s theme plays into the
campaign as a whole. You might want to keep similar or
recurring themes, especially if each adventure is part of
one overarching storyline. On the other hand, this can
feel repetitive, and some groups prefer variety and seeing
their characters play off of different situations. To convey
shifting themes, you can show established parts of the
world changing to reflect the new theme. For instance, if
you’re switching from an adventure about subjugation to
one of mayhem, the PCs could take down a villain who
wants to enslave the populace, but then face opportunistic
brigands who loot and pillage once order breaks down.

PLAYER GOALS

Ask what you and the other players enjoy and would like
to see in the game. You can use these ideas as touchstones
to build off of. When you get into the campaign itself,
the PCs’ goals come to the forefront. Find out what each
character wants to achieve and look for opportunities you
can place in the game world and adventures. Consider
which part of the game most closely ties to each goal. A
PC who wants to build an institution will need money
and interpersonal connections, so you can use treasure

36

18833844

4121791

4121791


Gamemastery Basics

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18833845

18833845

4121791

and NPC interactions to give them the resources they
need. For a character whose purpose is to help people in
danger, build some encounters that include people who
need to be rescued.
Look for good times to recap the state of a character’s
goals and remind the player how their character has
progressed, particularly when something changes in relation
to their goals. The Long-Term Goals section on page 22 gives
you more details on how you can use goals in downtime.

CHANGING THE WORLD

As the group moves through the campaign, the events
of their adventures and downtime should change the
world around them. Show this through the responses the
characters get from other people, the scenery they see
around them, and their environment. You might be able
to anticipate some changes, but most will come up in play
and require you to make adjustments later on.

POWER LEVEL
As the game progresses, the power level of the PCs
and their foes increases. Going up in level brings new,
stronger abilities into the game, and likewise adventures
bring in new monsters with commensurate capabilities.
Higher-level adventures should present new challenges
appropriate to the PCs’ abilities, such as areas that can
be accessed with flight at 7th level or higher. Beyond just

the rules, PCs should compel different reactions from the
people they meet, as their reputation spreads and they
exhibit abilities beyond what most people have ever seen.

RECURRING VILLAINS

Consider including villains who can appear multiple
times over the course of several adventures. They
don’t necessarily need to be masterminds. Imagine an
unscrupulous mercenary who works for major villain
after major villain. When you create a recurring villain,
it’s best not to make them too integral to the story, since
the PCs might take them down earlier than you expect!
Have some contingency plans in place.
The advice about Portraying NPCs on page 9 applies
especially to these recurring villains. As they reappear
throughout the campaign, they should change in some
of the same ways PCs do. Think about how previous
run-ins with the PCs have shaped the recurring villain’s
emotions and plans. Which PC do they have the biggest
grudge against and why? Do they bear scars from
previous battles? Have they developed a countermeasure
against a PC’s spells or tactics?

VILLAIN GOALS
Just as PCs have goals, so do your villains. A recurring
villain might have a vision for what the world should be and
a step-by-step plan to get there. A plan gives you a clear way

37

18833845

4121792

4121792


Gamemastery Guide

to progress the plot, and an underlying goal guides you in
deciding what the NPC does if their plan goes awry. It can be
especially helpful to contrast the villain’s goals with those of
the PCs. If a PC wants to establish a trade network, maybe a
villain plans to get rich robbing caravans or merchant ships.
If a PC plans to found churches to a deity, a villain could
worship one of that god’s adversaries. Just like with PCs’
goals, show how the villain’s goal has impacted the world,
even in small ways. Try to find ways the villain can make
a difference even if the PCs are successful against them. A
villain will look ineffective if the PCs foil every single plot or
plan. For instance, the villain might turn a memorable NPC
to their cause, set an institution ablaze, or invade a village.
All of these outcomes can have memorable, long-lasting
effects even if the villain’s ultimate plan fails.

REWARDS

The Core Rulebook explains (on page 507)
three types of concrete rewards covered by the
rules: Hero Points, Experience Points, and
treasure. Experience Points and treasure
are the bedrock of progress in a
campaign, since attaining a higher
level and acquiring magic
items let PCs take on more
challenging adventures.

EXPERIENCE POINTS

18833846

18833846

In a standard game, Experience Points come
from encounters of low threat or higher, and from
accomplishments. Try to be consistent about what is
worth accomplishment XP and what isn’t, and give out
at least some accomplishment XP every session. If two
PCs pull off the same magnitude of task, they should get
an equal amount of accomplishment XP. That doesn’t
mean you should allow XP “farming,” however. Part
of the assumption of accomplishment XP is that the
accomplishment is novel and the result of something
challenging. If someone got accomplishment XP for
snatching a dragon’s egg from a lair, someone collecting
another egg wouldn’t necessarily get accomplishment XP.
You might find that accomplishment XP doesn’t work
well for your game, especially if you’re running a dungeon
crawl or other game with less interaction with NPCs or
fewer quests. In this case, you can remove accomplishment
XP and use fast advancement speed (800 XP to level up)
to move at the standard advancement speed.

TREASURE
The game’s math is based on PCs looking to find, buy, or
craft items that are the same level as them—this includes
weapons and armor with fundamental runes, and items that
help with the PC’s favorite skills or tactics. A PC who gets
the item at that level will typically be ahead of the monsters,
hazards, and skill DCs briefly, before their challenges start
to catch back up. The guidelines for awarding treasure,

meanwhile, have you give the party items 1 level higher
than the PCs. This means the items found on adventures
are more powerful than those a PC could make (which
are capped at the PC’s level). The treasure assignment is
measured across a level instead of per encounter because
some encounters won’t have treasure, some will have
extra treasure, and some treasure hoards or rewards might
be found outside encounters entirely. If your campaign
structure works better by giving out treasure for individual
encounters—such as some dungeon crawls or sandbox
games—see Treasure by Encounter on page 51.
As you choose treasure, look at the flow of treasure
in the campaign, and see which PCs are ahead and
which are behind. It’s usually best to mix “core items,”
treasure linked to a PC’s main abilities, with treasure
that has unusual, less broadly applicable powers. For
instance, a champion might not purchase plate
armor of the deep, but they will likely wear it
if they find it. These items should always be
useful—a party without a primal spellcaster
won’t have much use for an animal staff.
The number of core items to give out
depends partly on how much the
campaign allows for crafting
and buying items.
• If there are few limits on
buying items and there’s plenty
of time to craft, make about half
the permanent items you give out core items. The PCs
have plenty of ways to obtain the items they want.
• If purchasing items and obtaining formulas is
somewhat difficult, make about three-fourths of the
permanent items core items. If a PC really wants an
item, they might have to do extra work to get it.
• If there are no magic item shops or other ways to
purchase items and formulas, make all the permanent
items core items. In this case, it might work better
for your game to use Automatic Bonus Progression
(page 196) to eliminate the need for core items.

4121792

Selling Items
The PCs’ ability to sell items plays a big part in their
ability to equip themselves how they want. It’s expected
that a Pathfinder campaign strives for some amount of
verisimilitude—that PCs can’t find a buyer for every item,
especially if they’re selling multiple copies of the same
thing. Players should not have the expectation that they
can sell whatever they want whenever they want. They
might be unable to sell items that wouldn’t be in demand,
have to take a lower percentage, or have trouble selling
items in places without massive wealth.
If you don’t want to deal with that level of detail, you can
choose to make selling items more abstract, allowing the
PCs to sell anything for half Price essentially at any time.
Since this makes it far easier for PCs to outfit themselves
how they want, they might be more powerful.

38

18833846

4121793

4121793

18833847

18833847


Gamemastery Basics

STARTING THE CAMPAIGN

Before your first session begins, communicate back and
forth with the players about the following details to make
sure you’ve planned your campaign to fit their preferences,
then recap and communicate your final decisions.
• Establish the expected schedule and generally how
long you expect the campaign to last. It’s okay if you
don’t know the total length for sure, but you should
still give an estimate.
• Inform the players when and where the first session
will take place, what they should prepare in advance,
and what materials to bring. If you’re running a
session zero to create characters first (page 7), let them
know. You might also need to tell them whether to
bring food, drinks, and other supplies beyond what
they’ll use for the game itself.
• Let the players know any restrictions or extra options
for character building. Even if you plan to run a session
zero, give them a heads-up before the session starts.
• Tell the players where in the game world the first
session will take place.
• Give the players a basic idea of the genre or theme.

AT THE FIRST SESSION
If you’re running a session zero, read the Session Zero
section on page 7 for advice on your first session. For the
first time you play through an adventure, follow these
bits of advice.
• Recap the basics of the campaign you established
earlier, particularly where it starts and any themes
you feel will be important for the players to
understand as they roleplay.
• Have the players introduce their characters. If they
have detailed backstories, it’s usually best that they
start out just describing what the other PCs could
learn with first impressions. If they want to go deeper
into their backstory during play, they can do so later.
• Ask questions about the characters. Note down
anything you think will be significant, so you can
adjust your plans for later sessions. You’ll want to
keep doing this throughout play.
• Begin the adventure, using the Starting a Session
steps on page 490 of the Core Rulebook. For your
first adventure, find a good place for the PCs to meet
and a reason for them to be together.

STARTING AT A HIGHER LEVEL
A typical campaign starts at 1st level, but you can start at a
higher level if you choose. This can be especially satisfying
for a one-shot or short campaign, or if your group wants
to play a specific adventure made for higher-level groups.
The PCs should start at the same level. They simply make
a 1st-level character, then level it up the number of times
needed to reach the starting level.
The Character Wealth table on page 511 of the Core
Rulebook indicates how much currency and what common

items of various levels the character should start with.
Let the players choose their own items and spend their
currency on common items as well if they choose. This
table gives them fewer items than they might have had if
they had gained items through adventuring, balancing the
fact that they can choose what items they want.

ENDING THE CAMPAIGN

A campaign might have a well-planned, emotionally
resonant ending that executes perfectly, or the group might
die in a ridiculous fashion at the worst time possible. It’s
important that the ending follow the story, wherever it has
gone, even if it doesn’t match the idea you had in your
head at the start. Check in with your group, especially
when you’re getting close to the end of each adventure, to
see how long they want the campaign to go on. Check in
with yourself, too, and express your opinion to the other
players. Ideally, you know at least a session in advance that
the end is coming, allowing you to prepare for a thrilling
conclusion. You might plan for the final session’s gameplay
to be a bit shorter—possibly just one big showdown—to
allow time for an epilogue and for the group to reminisce
and decompress at the end.
An epilogue can make the end of a campaign more
fulfilling. First, let the group finish out their roleplaying in
the final moments of the adventure until they’re content.
Then tell the group the results of what they accomplished
in broad terms, with concrete details of what happens to
certain places or allied NPCs. Ask the players what their
characters do after the adventure. You might want to narrate
a few short scenes, such as a PC tracking down an escaped
villain and bringing them to justice. When your epilogue is
done, thank everyone for playing. If the campaign ended in
success for the PCs, give yourselves a round of applause. A
victorious ending warrants celebration!

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121793

DEALING WITH FAILURE
If a campaign ends prematurely, get a sense from the
players of whether they want to continue. The advice
on Total Party Kills on page 30 should be helpful. If the
campaign ended in a stranger way than a total party kill—
say, a PC handing over the powerful relic the villain needed
to complete a master plan—you can still look for ways
the campaign might continue. Maybe the PCs struggle to
survive in the world after the calamity, or maybe they have
just enough time they might still be able to stop the plan.

THE NEXT CAMPAIGN
If the group plays another campaign in the same world
that takes place after your previous campaign, think
through the repercussions of the last campaign and change
the world as needed. You might introduce new elements
into the world that call back to the previous campaign:
newly powerful factions, new settlements, or new options
for player characters such as backgrounds, all based on the
impact the previous PCs made on the world.

39

18833847

4121794

4121794


Gamemastery Guide

ADVENTURE DESIGN

When making your own adventure, you get to choose the themes, play style, and NPCs that
most appeal to you and your group. This section gives you tips for making your adventures
exciting and memorable, and for creating them quickly and efficiently.
Creating an adventure for your players can be one of the
most fulfilling parts of being a GM. Get started with the
basic tips on adventure building on page 487 of the Core
Rulebook, then flesh out your adventure using the following
adventure recipes to quickly outline an adventure based on
your chosen theme. Reading other adventures is a great
way to get ideas, whether they’re published adventures or
ones your friends have written. You can borrow ideas and
structures if they work for your game, and tweak as needed.

PLAYER MOTIVATIONS

One of your most important and rewarding tasks is getting
to know your players and what makes them tick, then
implementing plot hooks that speak to their motivations.
If your players all like similar things (maybe they all like
epic storylines, or all prefer tactical combat), your job will
be a bit easier. But for most groups there’s a mix, and you’ll
want to put in a detailed NPC who appeals to one player’s
love of social scenes, a powerful villain to engage a player
who loves stories of winning against overwhelming odds,
and exotic animals that attract a player who’s into having
animal friends. If you’re not sure what your players enjoy,
ask them in advance what they’d like to see in the game!
Considering player motivations doesn’t mean assuming
you know what the players or their characters will do!
It can be risky to expect PCs to react in certain ways or
take certain paths. Knowing their motivations gives you
a way to put in elements you expect will appeal to your
players, but their decisions will still take the adventure in
unexpected directions. The important thing is getting the
players engaged, not predicting the future.

18833848

18833848

KEEPING IT VARIED

You can give players variety through the types of challenges
the group faces (combat, social, problem-solving, and so
on), the locations they explore, the NPCs they meet, the
monsters they face, and the treasure they acquire. Even if
you’re building an enclosed dungeon, you don’t want to
place a combat in every room, or exploration will quickly
become stale.
Think in terms of sessions. If your group gets through
five scenes per session, how do you make one game session
feel different from another? Maybe two of the scenes in
each are fairly basic combat encounters, but if you make
the other scenes significantly different, or even if you set the
encounters in different environments, the sessions won’t
feel repetitive. Also think about the tools used to solve
each situation. Maybe one requires complex negotiations,
another brute force, and a third sneaking about. Aim to

give everybody something compelling, and ideally targeted
at their motivations. This translates to mechanical details,
too. Inching across a balance beam requires different skills
than rebuilding a broken key.

THEME AND FEELING

Think about the emotional and thematic touchstones
you want to hit during play. Good games elicit strong
emotions, and planning for them can give an emotional arc
to an adventure in addition to the narrative arc. Consider
what you want players to feel as they play. Is it triumph?
Dread? Sadness? Optimism? None of these will be the only
emotions to come out, but they will inform how you build
the settings and NPCs. Adventure Recipes (below) gives
steps to effectively implement theme and feeling.

ADVENTURE RECIPES

These procedures help you build an adventure skeleton
or outline. You’ll then go through and flesh out the details
of the adventure, including adversaries and locations. As
you play, you’ll keep adjusting to fit the events of the
game. Anything you haven’t already introduced can be
changed as needed. Just like with any recipe, you’re meant
to adjust the details to fit your group’s preferences. You
might stray far from your starting point, and that’s OK!
These recipes use six steps. You might want to look
ahead to your future steps and make choices out of
order based on what’s most important for you to convey.
The catch‑all term “opposition” refers to the various
adversaries and obstacles the PCs will face. The opposition
should be thematically consistent, but not necessarily
monolithic. It might contain multiple individuals or
groups, who might not get along with one another.
• Styles (page 41): The overall vibe of your game, such
as a gritty game, dungeon crawl, or high adventure.
These frameworks offer guidelines for the number of
sessions and types of encounters that work best.
• Threats (page 43): Thematic dangers to incorporate
into your game, and ways to evoke them as you play.
The style and threat are the core parts of your recipe.
• Motivations (page 44): Determine more specifically
what the opposition’s goals and motivations are.
• Story Arcs (page 44): This section gives you guidance
on how to construct story arcs that will play out
over your adventure and maybe beyond.
• NPCs and Organizations (page 45): The characters
and factions you include should fit the theme.
• Mechanics (page 45): Your last step is adding in the
individual creatures, hazards, treasure, and so on.

4121794

40

18833848

4121795

4121795

18833849

18833849


Gamemastery Basics

STYLES

ADVENTURE PRESENTATION

These frameworks for building your adventure include
some basic elements to get you started outlining an
adventure. Slot ideas from the threats section (page 43)
into this structure, then customize as you see fit.

Dungeon Crawl
Number of Sessions 3–4
Exploration Scenes 1 long voyage to reach the dungeon; 3
voyages through long, trapped hallways or mazes; 1 secure
cave or other staging area; 2 secret passages or rooms
Combat Encounters 2 trivial, 4 low, 6 moderate, 6 severe. Many
encounters can be bypassed through secret routes.
Roleplaying Encounters 4 conversations with dungeon
creatures; 1 negotiation to establish a truce
Encounter Tropes Cramped quarters, short lines of sight, and
poor lighting conditions, with occasional vaulted chambers
and flooded crypts. Traps and puzzles.

Gritty Adventure
Number of Sessions 5–7
Exploration Scenes 1 long voyage, plagued by attacks; 2–3
voyages through urban environments; 1 prison break, heist,
or other test of skill
Combat Encounters 2 trivial, 4 low, 7 moderate, 8 severe;
possibly 1 extreme. Foes are often other humanoids.
Roleplaying Encounters 2 battles of wits, 2 chances to bypass
opponents with deception or threats, 2 opportunities to
gather information and rumors
Encounter Tropes Stakes are often more personal, such as the
PCs clearing their names from a false accusation or being
paid to eliminate a problem. Betrayal, ambushes, and other
duplicity. Town fires, weather conditions, unfriendly crowds.
The Pathfinder Critical Hit Deck is particularly appropriate.

High Adventure
Number of Sessions 6–8
Exploration Scenes 2 long voyages, often by sea or air,
punctuated with combat; 1 trapped dungeon, tournament, or
other test of skill
Combat Encounters 16 moderate, 8 severe. Avoid low- and
trivial-threat battles.
Roleplaying Encounters 2 battles of wits; 4 conversations with
bizarre creatures
Encounter Tropes Unique environments and terrain for dynamic
battles. Swinging from balconies on curtains, fighting atop
high wires, racing chariots, and so on. Use difficult terrain
sparingly, coupled with creative ways to get around it. Large
groups of low-level troops the PCs can defeat with ease.

Horror
Number of Sessions 1–2
Exploration Scenes 1 short voyage on foot; 2–4 creepy areas to
investigate, like haunted mansions or dark forests
Combat Encounters 2 moderate, 1 severe, possibly 1 extreme.
Avoid trivial- and low-threat encounters, except as moments

When you’re writing up your own adventure, you don’t need
to go into the same level of detail you’d see in a published
adventure. You might be able to get by with just an outline,
some bullet points for each NPC, a breakdown of encounters,
and a few rough maps. Or maybe for your style of running
games, you prefer to have some text written about each
scene, or even particular lines of dialogue. If you’re creating
your first adventure, it can be good to write out a little
more than you need. Just keep in mind that things might
change in play. If you prepared more than you actually used,
that’s normal! Detailing NPCs or locations in particular can
be useful, especially if they’re going to appear again. But in
many of these cases, you’ll add details at the table and can
jot down those notes for later.

RUNNING YOUR OWN ADVENTURE
It’s often easier to run an adventure you made yourself, but
that’s not true for everybody. If you notice as you run your
adventure that your notes don’t have enough for you to go
on, you can be more thorough next time. And if something
ended up inconsistent, there’s nothing wrong with telling your
players you want to revise something you previously said.
Because this is your own creation, it’s closer to your heart.
If the adventure doesn’t go well, it can sting. Sometimes this
is because of random chance, sometimes due to unforeseen
decisions, and occasionally because you made a mistake.
Those are all normal parts of the game! One of the things
you’ll internalize the more you run games is that you’re a part
of the creative process and don’t need to be perfect.

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121795

of relief in a longer adventure. Extreme-threat encounters
against overwhelming foes are excellent in horror one-shots.
Roleplaying Encounters 2 conversations with doubtful
authority figures, 1 opportunity to gather information and
rumors, 1 revelation of a horrible truth
Encounter Tropes Surprising and jarring encounters, making
it hard for the PCs to feel safe. Encounters that feel
overwhelming, even when they’re not. Retreat is often the
right option (include a reasonable way for the PCs to escape).

Intrigue
Number of Sessions 2–3
Exploration Scenes 1 long voyage, often by land or sea;
3–4 competitions, performances, or other test of skill;
1–2 infiltrations or escapes
Combat Encounters 2 trivial, 2 low, 4 moderate, 1 severe. Severethreat encounters should be reserved for major reveals of the
ongoing intrigue—an ally is revealed to be a foe, a schemer is
exposed and must call on his guard, and so on.
Roleplaying Encounters 2–3 battles of wits; 2 political or
courtroom scenes; 1 conversation with a cryptic source; 2
opportunities to gather information and rumors
Encounter Tropes Urban environments, including fights atop
runaway carriages, around (and atop) banquet tables, and

41

18833849

4121796

4121796


Gamemastery Guide

18833850

18833850

4121796

running over rooftops. Ambushes in apparently safe social
settings. Assassination attempts.

Military Adventure
Number of Sessions 2–3
Exploration Scenes 1 long march and 2–3 short marches, or a
tour of the defenses for a siege; 2–3 trapped enemy campsites
and secret spy redoubts
Combat Encounters 4 low, 4 moderate, 1 severe. Most combat
encounters should be made up of 2–4 foes, typically
humanoid soldiers with a range of capabilities.
Roleplaying Encounters 1–2 skill challenges to convince neutral
parties to become allies or raise troops’ morale
Encounter Tropes Fortified battlegrounds, with moats, walls,
defensive towers, and siege weapons. Victory conditions that
are goal or deadline oriented—holding a gate for 10 minutes
while reserves rush to defend it, setting fire to an enemy
catapult, rescuing prisoners, and so on.

Mystery
Number of Sessions 2–3
Exploration Scenes 2–3 trapped rooms, concealed hideouts, or
other tests of skill; 2 puzzles or investigations
Combat Encounters 2 trivial, 4 low, 6 moderate, 6 severe.
Solving the mystery uncovers an advantage over the most
powerful foe.
Roleplaying Encounters 1 battles of wits, 1 conversation with

a bizarre creature, 1 opportunity to gather information and
rumors, 1 gathering to reveal the answer to the mystery
Encounter Tropes Encounters come naturally during
investigations or upon discovering some element of the
mystery. Multiple clues can send PCs to the same locations;
if the mystery stalls, some creature that doesn’t want the PCs
to solve the mystery can attack to move the plot forward.

Planar Adventure
Number of Sessions 6–8
Exploration Scenes 3–4 long voyages through different planes,
often by gate, spells, or planar vessel, punctuated by combat;
1–2 scouting a demiplane, planar city or fortress, or other
planar stronghold
Combat Encounters 12 moderate, 12 severe. Avoid trivial- and
low-threat encounters, except as set dressing to introduce a
new plane.
Roleplaying Encounters 6 conversations with bizarre creatures,
including some with alien ways of thinking; 2 opportunities
to gather information and rumors
Encounter Tropes Fights showcasing otherworldly environs—
on the sides of glaciers, in limitless oceans, on chunks of
rock floating along rivers of lava, atop bottomless pits, or
on the chains of 100-foot-tall gates.

Romantic Adventure
Number of Sessions 4–6

42

18833850

4121797

4121797

18833851

18833851


Gamemastery Basics

Exploration Scenes 1 tour of a kingdom or other central locale;
1 adventure into the wilds on a hunting trip or bandit hunt;
1 tournament to prove a PC’s love or worth
Combat Encounters 3 low, 6 moderate, 3 severe. Emphasize
emotional stakes and battles that end with the loss of honor
or pride, not life.
Roleplaying Encounters 2 battles of wits, 1 grand ball,
1 entreaty before a ruler, 2 scenes of relaxation or carousing
with unexpected import
Encounter Tropes Duels—social or combat—against romantic
rivals. PCs and their foes fight only for a purpose or cause.
Savvy enemies have strong connections to the PCs.

Extremism
The opposition seeks a massive change—one they think is for
the better. Their violent means of achieving it put them in
conflict with the PCs.
• Demonstrate the ruthlessness of the enemy, especially the
discrepancy between their care for their cause and their
ambivalence or hatred toward everything else.
• Have enemies focus purely on their goal. Have them fall
back on their rhetoric or dogma to justify themselves.
• If something about the extremists’ cause is just—such as
preserving the natural world or protecting their people—
reveal the foes’ sympathetic side. Demonstrate the horror

THREATS
Think of each type of threat as the deep, visceral danger
the enemies represent. NPCs should be avatars of the
threat, whether they’re enemies who represent different
aspects of the threat or allies and bystanders damaged by
it. Each threat entry gives a brief description, followed by
some bullet points you can use to guide you in expressing
the consequences of the threat. This is followed by
monsters that typify this theme. As always, you can come
up with your own thematic threats too!

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

Corruption
The opposition wants to weaken or even change the motivation
of a place, person, institution, ideal, or group.
• Show the effects of corruption on people and places,
especially those closely connected to the PCs. Once-safe
areas become less friendly and present threats, allies
become unable to help or even turn against the PCs.
• Make enemies subtle; patient; and willing to allow rumors,
lies, diseases, and poisons time to take effect. In battle,
they may be satisfied to curse PCs and their allies or
otherwise inflict long-term afflictions, then retreat.
• Contrast the corruption with education, healing, and
working towards betterment.
• When the PCs make progress, allow them to expose agents
of corruption, and inoculate allies and neutral parties
against the growing threat or educate them about it.
Foes alghollthu, fiends, undead

4121797

Devastation
The opposition wants to destroy or lay waste to a place,
person, institution, ideal, or group.
• Show the effects of destruction on people and
places, especially those the PCs hold dear.
Show them desperate, devoid of resources, and
psychologically changed.
• Make enemies hard to reason with and overwhelming in
number. In battle, they want not just to win, but to kill,
maim, or devour.
• Contrast devastation with forces of preservation and order.
• When the PCs make progress, show the slow recovery
from devastation.
Foes chromatic dragons, demons, orcs

43

18833851

4121798

4121798


Gamemastery Guide

BUILDING A SANDBOX
In a “sandbox” game, you give the players a sizable location
to explore and let them decide how to go about it. A sandbox
doesn’t have as many time-sensitive events as a directed
adventure, and the flow of the game is driven more by the
players than by the opposition. You can put self-contained
dungeons or other locations within the sandbox, but it’s up
to the players when and how to visit them or deal with them.
To make a sandbox, create about triple the number of
encounters and spread them out among multiple locations or
factions. You can expect the PCs won’t deal with all of them. In
most cases, you’ll want to determine where the PCs are headed
next before the end of a session so you can prepare for the next
session. Depending on the size and complexity of the location,
the number of encounters might be much higher. Treat each
sub-area as a kind of mini-adventure, and only loosely sketch it
until you know what the PCs’ plans are.

of what they’re fighting against in addition to the horror of
the way they fight it.
• When the PCs make progress, show uncertainty or
demoralization in their foes, possibly even desertion.
Foes cultists, revolutionaries

Mayhem
The opposition is a force for mayhem, without any greater plan
or long-term goal. It may be a mindless force of violence such as
a wounded beast, or a thinking foe that simply revels in causing
chaos and damage.
• Mayhem is easy to track and find, often leaving a trail of
destruction in its path. Show how the senseless violence
causes uncertainty and fear, disrupting both settlements
and the natural order of things.
• A single powerful foe is a common source of mayhem, but
a pack, herd, cult, or secret society could also be to blame.
The source of the mayhem may be the result of the natural
order being out of balance, or might be a distraction set off
by a different foe looking to use it to further its own goals.
• Emphasize the cascading effects of unchecked mayhem.
Normal trade, farming, migration, and similar systems
are disrupted, causing problems far from the immediate
location of violence and disruption.
• When the PCs make progress, show how resilient systems
can recover from massive disruptions but may need
additional help or protection.
Foes beasts, dinosaurs, drakes, giants

18833852

18833852

Subjugation
The opposition wants to rule over a group, location, or even the
world. Their ultimate objective is to control and rule.
• Show how groups submit to subjugation rather than suffer
the consequences of resistance. The PCs see elements of
culture destroyed to ensure subjugation—are religions and
churches destroyed, subverted, or replaced? Are lackeys
put in place to keep oppressed populations in line?

• Make enemies self-righteous, focused, and in control of
groups they have previously subjugated. Fights aren’t just
for the sake of violence, but steps towards greater control.
• Show opposition: open conflict, rebellion, secret
groups, sabotage, and countercultural art. Give PCs the
opportunity to support or participate in each.
• When the PCs make progress, have previously cowed or
neutral parties be moved to rebel.
Foes chromatic dragons, devils, hags, hobgoblins, rakshasas

MOTIVATIONS
Think about your opposition, and what their goals and
motivations are. The motivation of the opposition needs
to match your threat. If you have multiple adversaries,
their motivations should all work toward your theme,
but they might have different goals and act more as
rivals or enemies. Motivations should be more than one
dimensional. There should be a reason for every action
the opposition takes—not necessarily a good one or a
smart one, but a believable one. Be true to each character!
Consider these questions so you can use the answers
when deciding what the opposition will do.
• What does the opposition want?
• Who or what does the opposition fear? (And no,
“the PCs” isn’t an answer.)
• Why is the opposition sure to succeed? If the PCs don’t
do anything, what makes the opposition unstoppable?
• What are the opposition’s weaknesses? How can
they be bribed or tricked? What’s something they
ignore that might be used against them?

4121798

STORY ARCS
Keep several story arcs in mind. Most of these will be driven
by the opposition in the early going, but PCs might initiate
their own story arcs. Think of what the beginning, middle,
and end of each arc might look like. Imagine a logical end
point the arc would reach if nothing else changes. Then,
adjust it based on events in the game. As changes occur,
revisit the end point you’ve imagined. If the adversary’s
plan has been derailed, what might they do instead? Story
arcs should reflect the theme of the adventure and be
well‑positioned to show off motivations.
Many arcs will last only for the duration of one
adventure, but others build up and recur across the whole
campaign. Include some of each so you have variety.
This also provides closure, as the players can see some
storylines wrapped up in the short term and others over
a long period. Too many dangling plot threads can result
in some being forgotten or make players feel overloaded.
Touchstones like the ones below make a story arc
adaptable, not too restricted to specific scenes or characters.
• Use motifs. Use repeated thematic elements, visuals,
phrases, and items to reinforce the connection
between one adventure or segment of the story and
another. The motif can also build in complexity as
you move further along in the overarching story.

44

18833852

4121799

4121799


Gamemastery Basics

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18833853

18833853

4121799

• Follow character growth. Respond to how the
PCs changed in previous adventures. Their next
undertaking should reflect who they are now.
• Escalate! Build on the previous story and show that
the next threat is scarier. The first adventure may
endanger a village, the next a city, the next a whole
nation, and so on.
• Bring in recurring characters. A recurring character
is especially strong if they appear in similar
circumstances each time. For instance, a merchant
who travels the world might appear in the campaign
only when she wants the PCs to undermine her rivals.
• Make each adventure count. While developing an
arc, don’t diminish individual adventures by making
what happened in them inconsequential compared
to the larger story. Illustrate the consequences
of such adventures so the players feel a sense of
accomplishment for completing one before they
move onto the next. Each adventure needs some sort
of denouement to show immediate and lingering
effects of the PCs’ victory or defeat.

NPCS AND ORGANIZATIONS
Allied, neutral, and adversarial NPCs and organizations
can all contribute to the theme. You’ll want most to
follow the theme directly, like the examples in Threats
on page 43. However, you can add a few counterpoints

to the theme. For example, a horror game might include
one or two NPCs who are more hopeful, either to grant
respite from the dread or to kill off to show just how
bad things are. Including NPCs who aren’t adversaries
makes the world feel more real. It also increases the
stakes, as PCs have people to care about, protect, and
socialize with. You’ll often find that NPCs you create
will become more or less important than you expected.
You can “demote” an NPC if the players don’t find them
interesting or “promote” them if the PCs like them more
than expected.

MECHANICS
Last of all, you’ll fill out specific encounters, NPCs, treasure
hoards, maps, and so on. For many games, you can save
most of this work for between later sessions, spreading out
your preparations over the course of the game.
You can find more detail on these in the Core Rulebook:
• Treasure guidelines (page 508)
• Accomplishment XP (page 507)
• Environments (page 512)
• Building Encounters (page 488)
• Hazards (page 522)
You can also find more information on these in this book:
• Building your own creatures (page 56)
• Building your own hazards (page 74)
• Building encounters (page 46)

45

18833853

4121800

4121800


Gamemastery Guide

ENCOUNTER DESIGN

Creating a compelling encounter goes beyond just following the guidelines for selecting
monsters of a given level. Good encounters have a place in the story, compelling adversaries,
interesting locations, and twists and turns to make them dynamic.
Encounters play a fundamental part in roleplaying games,
but it can be tricky to know where to start when building
them. This section covers ways to expand on the basics
provided on page 489 of the Core Rulebook to make
your encounters an exciting and integral part of the plot.
Encounter design goes hand in hand with location, map, and
adventure design. You might set an adventure in a swamp
and populate it with swamp creatures and environmental
features. Or you might have a dungeon denizen in mind,
and structure a section of your dungeon to fit that creature.
When you’re starting out, straightforward encounters of
low or moderate threat can let you get your bearings. Then,
you can increase complexity as you get more confident and
as the PCs collect more tools to use against their foes. The
more encounters you build, the more comfortable you’ll get
with your own personal style. You can always come back
here to get more ideas or advice on executing a certain type
of encounter.

VARIETY

Variety in encounters is essential to let players try new
tactics and give different PCs chances to shine as they face
foes with weak points they’re uniquely suited to exploiting.
Consider the following forms of encounter variety.
• Theme: Look for ways to include varied creatures
and locations. Even if the PCs delve into a dungeon
inhabited by drow, they should encounter other
creatures, too! All creatures should have a justification
for fitting in, but no place needs to be uniform.
• Difficulty: A string of moderate-threat encounters can
feel flat. Use low- and even trivial-threat encounters
to give PCs chances to really dominate, and severethreat encounters for especially powerful enemies.
Extreme-threat encounters should be used sparingly,
for enemies who match the threat posed by the PCs
and have a solid chance of beating them!
• Complexity: Use high complexity judiciously, saving it
for important or memorable fights.
• Encounter Composition: The number of creatures per
encounter and their levels should vary. Higher-level
single enemies, squads of enemies, and large numbers
of lackeys all feel different.
• Setup: Not all encounters should start and end
the same way. PCs might sneak up on unprepared
enemies, get ambushed by foes hunting them, enter
into a formal duel, or find a diplomatic overture fails
and turns into a fight. On the other side, enemies might
all be taken out, retreat, beg for mercy, or even shift the
encounter to a chase or other phase.

18833854

18833854

• Information: Uncertainty can increase the tension
and sense of danger the players feel. Ambushes, fights
against unknown foes or foes behind battlements, and
other scenarios can create this basic uncertainty.

ENCOUNTER LOCATIONS

Choose compelling settings for your encounters. When
encounters take place in a building or lair, the most
significant environmental features originate from the
occupants, both past and present. Think about their tastes,
biology, or wealth. These features could be natural, such as
the sickening reek of decay in the lair of a great predator.
They could also be alchemical, such as a cloud of poisonous
gas, or magical, such as a strange electric current that arcs
through the walls and occasionally leaps out at passersby.
In some cases, you’ll have a location in which an enemy
always appears, and you can design your location to suit that
specific creature. Other times, an encounter might appear in
a variety of places, such as a guard patrol or wandering
monster. In these cases, you’ll need several terrain and
structure options so there’s something interesting about the
environment no matter where the battle takes place.

4121800

MAPS AND TERRAIN
Features on the map have a substantial impact on the flow
of combat. Three considerations to keep in mind when
designing a map are maneuverability, line of sight, and
attack ranges. Even empty rooms and corridors can provide
variety based on their size and shape. Narrow passageways
make natural choke points. In particularly small rooms,
space is at a premium, favoring melee combatants and
making area effects hard to aim without friendly fire. By
contrast, huge areas lend themselves to spread-out combat,
which gives plenty of room to use all manner of abilities but
poses challenges for ones with limited range. To make large
rooms more interesting, add furniture, stalagmites, or other
features the PCs and their foes can duck behind for cover.

INHABITANT OR INTRUDER?
In most cases, the PCs enter territory that’s far more
familiar to their foes than it is to them. NPCs and monsters
who live in an area are likely to be adapted to its dangers,
either because they know where they are and how to avoid
them, or because they are unaffected by them. A kobold
in their lair might bait a PC into walking into a trap the
kobold avoided. Marshland may be troublesome terrain for
most PCs, but it poses little inconvenience to amphibious
creatures. When using creatures with the ability to burrow,
climb, or swim, consider incorporating features such as

46

18833854

4121801

4121801


Gamemastery Basics

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18833855

18833855

4121801

mazelike corridors, high walls with platforms, or rivers.
If the foes are smaller or larger than the PCs, consider
including paths, cubbyholes, staircases, or narrow passages
that one side of the fight can use more effectively.
Sometimes, though, the PCs must defend their own base
from intruders. In these situations, you’re flipping the script,
so give the PCs time to trap and ward the area. Watching
the invaders fall prey to hazards and ambushes can be a
delightful change of pace for your players.

Climbing, Swimming, or pushing through difficult terrain
can be much tougher—especially if the enemies have
strong ranged attacks. Think about the impact of the
terrain in advance, especially if the battle would already be
a severe threat, or you might kill the party. You can pick
an equivalent monster level for your terrain and factor that
into your budget, or just assign extra XP at the end if the
threat without terrain is on the low or moderate end.

WILD WEATHER

Every encounter should happen for a reason. Consider
a creature’s motivation to fight. Is it defending its lair?
Robbing to enrich itself? Following sadistic impulses?
Simply being paid to fight? You may realize a creature
doesn’t have a compelling motivation, or that the PCs have
done something that eliminates the impetus to fight. In that
case, the encounter doesn’t need to happen! Your game
might be more satisfying if the PCs’ clever actions avoid the
fight—provided you award them XP accordingly.

On a bright, sunny day, the PCs see clearly and fight without
obstruction, but adding wind, precipitation, or fog creates
additional challenges. Rain creates sloshy, muddy ground
that slows movement, and cold weather introduces the
threat of slippery patches of ice. Only the most extreme
temperatures have a direct impact on the PCs during an
encounter, but a slog through blistering heat or freezing
cold can leave the PCs worn out and more vulnerable to
foes. Light levels play a key role in both outdoor and indoor
encounters. Although torches are plentiful, their reach is
limited, and lights are sure to draw attention in dark areas.

BUDGETING FOR TERRAIN
If you include terrain that’s tricky to navigate or takes
extra work to deal with, consider whether it should count
toward the encounter’s XP budget. A fight that requires

ENEMY MOTIVATIONS

MORALE
Think how an enemy reacts when a fight is going poorly
for them—or well! Enemies who do something other than
fight to the death make an encounter more dynamic and
believable. While PCs occasionally encounter truly fanatical
zealots or single-minded creatures that would never back
down from a fight, most creatures—even nonsapient

47

18833855

4121802

4121802


Gamemastery Guide

QUICK ADVENTURE GROUPS
If you want an easy framework for building an encounter,
you can use one of the following basic structures and slot in
monsters and NPCs.
• Boss and Lackeys (120 XP): One creature of party level +
2, four creatures of party level – 4
• Boss and Lieutenant (120 XP): One creature of party level +
2, one creature of party level
• Elite Enemies (120 XP): Three creatures of party level
• Lieutenant and Lackeys (80 XP): One creature of party
level, four creatures of party level – 4
• Mated Pair (80 XP): Two creatures of party level
• Troop (80 XP): One creature of party level, two creatures
of party level – 2
• Mook Squad (60 XP): Six creatures of party level – 4

creatures like animals—back down from a battle they’re
obviously losing. This normally means foes fleeing at
a certain point, potentially ending the encounter, but if
the PCs need to capture those opponents, it could add a
secondary objective and split their focus. Look at how
differences in morale between participants impact the fight.
For instance, after the necromancer’s living allies surrender
to the PCs, she might activate a latent magic she implanted
within them, killing them and merging their bodies into an
enormous undead abomination. An enemy’s morale could
even change the encounter from combat to social, as the PCs
enter negotiations over a surrender or try to convince their
foes of the errors of their ways.

18833856

18833856

DYNAMIC ENCOUNTERS

While you can certainly create enjoyable encounters by
placing a group of opponents in a square room with little
else, you have numerous tools to create encounters that are
more interactive and dynamic. These tools can challenge
your players to invent new strategies, inspire interesting
character decisions, and make your setting richer.
No encounter needs to use all of the elements presented
here, and not all encounters need more than one or two. The
more complex a dynamic encounter is, the longer it takes to
run and the more demanding it is. In general, these tools are
perfectly suited for boss encounters, for memorable foes,
and as a spice to add throughout your campaign however
often works best for you and your players.

HAZARDS IN COMBAT
In isolated encounters where the PCs have plenty of time to
recover from hazards’ effects, simple hazards can feel more
like speed bumps than true challenges. But when combined
with other threats, even simple hazards can prove perilous.
A noisy explosion can draw attention, allowing foes to
burst through the door for a dramatic start to the encounter.
Simple hazards can also be an active part of an encounter,
particularly if the foes know how to avoid triggering them.
As their name suggests, complex hazards are a more

powerful tool for encounters. Because they continue to act,
they are an ongoing presence in the fight. When combined
with hostile creatures, complex hazards offer the PCs
plenty of choices for what they want to do next. This is
particularly true if foes benefit from the hazard. Should
the PCs first disable the array of pipes spewing magical fire
into the room, or should they prioritize the fire elemental
growing stronger with exposure to the inferno? There’s no
right answer, and the PCs’ choices have a clear impact on
the obstacles they face. Hazards in combat shine when they
give the PCs ways to contribute meaningfully other than
dealing damage to a creature. Interesting actions to disable
a hazard are a fun way to give several PCs something fresh
and different to do rather than piling on damage.

EVOLVING BATTLEFIELDS
While some battlefields are relatively static, allowing the
PCs and foes to clobber each other until one side wins,
complex or evolving battlefields can lead to far more
memorable encounters. One of the most straightforward
ways to create an evolving battlefield is with dynamic
environmental features. Maybe the floating platforms that
make up the room’s floor shuffle around on their own
turn each round, or various points teleport creatures to
different locations—possibly between two rooms where
separate battles take place simultaneously. These dynamic
features have some overlap with complex hazards, though
they don’t tend to be an opposition or obstacle specifically
threatening the PCs.
Similarly, a third party in the encounter, perhaps a
rampaging monster or a restless spirit, could pose a danger
to both sides but potentially benefit either. For instance,
perhaps the PCs or their foes could harness this third party
as a dangerous but powerful ally with a successful skill
check of some kind or by making a risky bargain.
Sometimes the evolving battlefield is more of a state
change, or series of state changes, and less of a constant
presence. For instance, defeating a ritualist and ending his
ritual could cause the foes to lose a powerful beneficial effect
but unleash a demon that crawled through the remains of
the botched ritual, or cause part of the room to collapse
from the magical backlash. Major physical changes to the
environment, like such a collapse, portions of the room
rising or falling, or water beginning to rush in and fill the
room, can force the PCs to rethink their plans to handle the
new situation. Sometimes the evolving battlefield is more
of an unexpected plot twist that occurs in the middle of
the encounter. Perhaps the evil tyrant reveals that they were
a dragon all along, or reinforcements arrive for whichever
side was outmatched. Whatever you choose, make sure
it changes things up and makes the encounter feel more
dynamic and different. For instance, raising up a portion of
the battlefield that isn’t particularly relevant when neither
the PCs nor their foes are likely to care is less interesting
than raising up the pedestal holding the jewel the PCs and
their enemies are trying to recover.

4121802

48

18833856

4121803

4121803


Gamemastery Basics

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18833857

18833857

4121803

COMBINING AND SEPARATING ENCOUNTERS
Picture this: the PCs storm a castle. They choose to eschew
stealth in favor of a direct approach. On the ramparts, a
guard spots them and raises an alarm. The sound of horns
and whistles blare throughout the keep as each defender
ensures that everyone is ready for a fight. And then, they
politely wait in whatever room they were already standing
in for the PCs to come and attack them. It sounds pretty
unrealistic, and it feels unrealistic at the table. Many
players find it far more satisfying when their foes take
reasonable actions and countermeasures against them.
This means moving to defensible positions or banding
together with allies. Taken to an extreme, combining
encounters can quickly lead to fights that are unwinnable,
so be careful. In the castle example, some guards may
come out to attack the PCs, while others cluster around
the central keep. Perhaps each individual patrol of guards
around the castle is a trivial-threat encounter, but as they
gather together, they form groups of gradually escalating
threat. Such groups give the PCs a sense of how challenging
their opposition is, so that if a fight against six guards is a
challenge, they won’t try to pick a fight with 30. When the
PCs’ foes amass into an overwhelming force, give the PCs
fair warning and a chance to retreat and try again another
day. Of course, if the PCs come back after the alarm has
been raised, the guards are likely to change their rotations
to better secure the keep.

The most common reason to separate an encounter
into multiple pieces is to set up a combined encounter, like
when an injured foe retreats to gather reinforcements. This
provides the PCs with a choice: do they ignore the fleeing
enemy and focus on the battle in front of them, or do they
split their own forces, weighing the risk of being led into a
dangerous encounter against the chance of stopping later
foes from preparing for their approach? An encounter might
also separate into pieces because of dramatic changes to the
battlefield, such as a collapsing ceiling or a magical wall that
prevents those on each side of the barrier from accessing the
other without spending actions to bypass the obstruction.

TIME PRESSURE
Time pressure adds an extra sense of urgency to any
encounter and can be a great way to make an otherwise
trivial- or low-threat encounter tactically engaging,
satisfying, and memorable. After all, while low- and
trivial‑threat encounters have an incredibly low chance of
defeating the PCs, the opposition can usually hold on long
enough to make the PCs spend a few rounds to defeat them
unless the PCs expend more resources than they normally
would on such foes. Time pressure is often related to a
secondary objective in the encounter, though it could be
a countdown directly related to the encounter itself. For
instance, if the ritual will grant a lich its apotheosis in 4
rounds, the heroes need to defeat the lich before then!

49

18833857

4121804

4121804


Gamemastery Guide

PITFALLS
This section arms you with a wide variety of useful tricks to
add interest to your encounters, but you should keep an eye
out for some common pitfalls of encounter building.
• Don’t Make Every Encounter Complex: There are many
ways to make complex and dynamic encounters, but
making every single encounter complex will become
exhausting for you and your players. Some encounters
should be simple, both because it will make the world feel
more real and because it’s a good way for the group to relax
without as much to keep track of.
• Avoid Flat Difficulty: Ensure that not too many of your
encounters fall at the same threat level. Having some low‑
and even trivial-threat battles adds variety, and it’s great to
throw in a few severe encounters beyond just bosses.
• Beware of Unexpected Difficulty: You might end up with
creatures that have abilities that fit well together, making
them extremely powerful as a combo, or that are particularly
well-suited against your PCs. Compare the creatures and
what you know about your PCs in advance, especially if
the encounter is already a severe threat by the numbers.
Page 16 has suggestions for what to do if you find a spike in
difficulty during an encounter rather than in advance.
• Watch for Overpowered Terrain: As noted under Budgeting
for Terrain, some features of the environment can increase
the danger drastically. Consider your creature and the
environment, and see whether the creature has a massive
advantage compared to PCs in that terrain, such as a
monster with powerful, long-range attacks when PCs are
stuck at a distance. If so, you might want to adjust.

18833858

18833858

SECONDARY OBJECTIVES
One of the simplest and most exciting ways to create
a dynamic encounter, even if the combat itself is not so
difficult, is to add a secondary objective beyond simply
defeating foes. Perhaps the villains are about to burn
captives in a fire, and some of the PCs need to divert their
efforts to avoid a pyrrhic victory. Encounters with a parallel
objective that require PCs to take actions other than
destroying foes can keep those foes around long enough to
do interesting things without inflating their power level. It
also makes PCs skilled in areas related to the side mission
feel amazing when they handle it quickly or well.
Sometimes a secondary objective might present a time
limit, like if the PCs need to prevent evidence from being
burned, either by fighting quickly or actively protecting
the documents. Another type of secondary objective
relates to how the PCs engage in combat with the primary
opposition. The PCs might need to use nonlethal attacks
against guards who mistakenly believe the PCs are
criminals, or they might need to prevent slippery scouts
from retreating to alert others. Options like these highlight
mobile characters like the monk. You could even create
truly off-the-wall secondary objectives that require the PCs
to lose the encounter in order to succeed. The PCs might

need to put up a believable fight but retreat and let foes steal
their caravan in order to follow the foes back to their lair.
Secondary objectives are a great way to highlight different
abilities in combat and make for a memorable encounter,
but—like all of these tactics—they can become annoying
if overused.

OPPONENT SYNERGY
Most encounters assume that the PCs’ opponents work
together to oppose the PCs, but when groups of foes have
been collaborating and fighting together for a long time,
they can develop additional strategies. Consider giving each
member of these tightly knit teams a reaction triggered by
their allies’ abilities, or another benefit they gain based on
their allies’ actions. Just as a team of PCs learns how to best
position the rogue to flank enemies and minimize the harm
they take from the wizard’s fireball spell, NPCs can learn
to complement each other’s strategies and avoid interfering
with each other. On the opposite end of the spectrum,
opponents with poor coordination make the fight much
easier for the PCs. Poor coordination between mindless
creatures is common, and PCs can use clever tactics to
run circles around these foes. When intelligent creatures
accidentally (or deliberately) harm each other or pursue
conflicting strategies, particularly if they engage in banter
with each other as they fight, it can make for an amusing
break in the typical rhythm of combat.
When taken to its extreme, synergy can represent the
actions of a hive mind or a single massive creature. These
synergistic components can be creatures, hazards, or both.
For example, instead of representing a kraken the size of
a warship as a single foe, you could represent each of its
tentacles as an individual opponent. Perhaps the kraken
can sacrifice actions it would otherwise use to crush PCs
in its maw to use its tentacles more freely. In this case, you
could model a field of tentacles as a complex hazard that
mainly reacts to the PCs moving within it, but allow the
kraken’s head to act with a few tentacles directly.

4121804

MISDIRECTION
Sometimes, a bit of misdirection can add a lot of interest
to an encounter, especially against offense‑heavy groups.
Rather than amping up the opposition to match the PCs’
firepower and creating opponents whose own offenses are
too powerful for the PCs’ defenses, consider a little sleight
of hand. For instance, a villain might have an illusory or
disguised decoy target with just enough durability to take
a few hits while the true villain is hiding nearby, ready to
emerge and attack. Spells like project image can allow a
foe to attack from a safer position, and possession grants
the foe a disposable body unless the PCs brought along
spirit blast or similar magic. Sometimes you can even hide
the villain in plain sight: for instance, in an encounter with
three goblins with similar‑looking gear and an ogre, one
of the goblins might be the biggest threat, but the PCs are
likely to target the ogre first.

50

18833858

4121805

4121805

18833859

18833859


Gamemastery Basics

Care when setting up the battle map can also go a long
way to misdirect your players—or at least avoid accidentally
telegraphing what an encounter will be. For instance, if you
always put out statue minis whenever there are statues in
the room, the PCs might at first be overly suspicious of
ordinary statues, but they will be more surprised later on
when a statue turns out to be a construct than if you place
minis only when the statue is actually a construct.

RECURRING VILLAINS
Not every villain dies the first time the PCs defeat them in
combat. Some may escape, perhaps through teleportation,
misdirection, or with other ploys. When a villain escapes
and lives to fight the PCs again another day, it’s good to
have that foe learn from their past failures. In their next
encounter with the PCs, give them additional minions,
spells, or other defenses designed to counteract the
strategies the PCs used against them previously. Even if the
villain doesn’t escape, they might have other tricks up their
sleeves, rising again to oppose the PCs. They could well
return later in the adventure—or they might come back
immediately for a second battle, so long as there is a proper
justification for doing so. For example, a previously living
necromancer might rise again as an undead monstrosity
bent upon destroying the PCs, or defeating an otherworldly
villain’s outer shell might reveal its terrible true form.

SOCIAL ENCOUNTERS

The setup for a social encounter tends to be less detailed. For
the NPCs involved, you’ll just need statistics for their social
skills, Perception, and Will. If you’re making your own, you
can find guidelines under Non-Combat Level on page 72.
You also need to decide the objective or consequences of

the social encounter—what the PCs can achieve and what
happens if they fail—and the form of the challenge. It might
be a public debate, a private audience with a powerful person,
or some kind of contest. Just like with combat encounters,
think about the environment, with a particular eye toward
the other people around. Is there a crowd the PCs can sway?
Are they in an imposing, luxurious throne room or at a city
gate? Is the atmosphere oppressive? Hopeful?
You might find the PCs’ goal ends up being quite different
from what you initially thought they would be. Fortunately,
social encounters can be pretty adaptable. Thinking of their
likely objective helps you construct the scene in your mind
more easily but shouldn’t limit you.
The basics of social encounters are on Core Rulebook
page 494, and page 16 of this book has more advice.

TREASURE BY
ENCOUNTER

The standard rules count treasure over the course of a
level, rather than dividing it up by encounter. If you need to
select treasure for a single encounter, such as in a sandbox
game, you can use the table below. It takes the treasure
budget for each level from Table 10–9 on page 509 of the
Core Rulebook and breaks that down per encounter based
on the encounter threat, similar to how XP varies by threat.
The final column shows extra treasure you should award
if you build an entire level this way. Unlike the standard
table, this doesn’t include items by item level, as the value
doesn’t cleanly break down for most single encounters. It’s
recommended you still give out those permanent items,
but you’ll need to borrow from other encounters’ treasure
to account for their value. Include encounters against
creatures without treasure to account for this.

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121805

TABLE 1–3: TREASURE BY ENCOUNTER
Level
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Total Treasure per Level
175 gp
300 gp
500 gp
850 gp
1,350 gp
2,000 gp
2,900 gp
4,000 gp
5,700 gp
8,000 gp
11,500 gp
16,500 gp
25,000 gp
36,500 gp
54,500 gp
82,500 gp
128,000 gp
208,000 gp
355,000 gp
490,000 gp

Low
13 gp
23 gp
38 gp
65 gp
100 gp
150 gp
220 gp
300 gp
430 gp
600 gp
865 gp
1,250 gp
1,875 gp
2,750 gp
4,100 gp
6,200 gp
9,600 gp
15,600 gp
26,600 gp
36,800 gp

Moderate
18 gp
30 gp
50 gp
85 gp
135 gp
200 gp
290 gp
400 gp
570 gp
800 gp
1,150 gp
1,650 gp
2,500 gp
3,650 gp
5,450 gp
8,250 gp
12,800 gp
20,800 gp
35,500 gp
49,000 gp

Severe
26 gp
45 gp
75 gp
130 gp
200 gp
300 gp
440 gp
600 gp
860 gp
1,200 gp
1,725 gp
2,475 gp
3,750 gp
5,500 gp
8,200 gp
12,400 gp
19,200 gp
31,200 gp
53,250 gp
73,500 gp

Extreme
35 gp
60 gp
100 gp
170 gp
270 gp
400 gp
580 gp
800 gp
1,140 gp
1,600 gp
2,300 gp
3,300 gp
5,000 gp
7,300 gp
10,900 gp
16,500 gp
25,600 gp
41,600 gp
71,000 gp
98,000 gp

Extra Treasure
35 gp
60 gp
100 gp
170 gp
270 gp
400 gp
580 gp
800 gp
1,140 gp
1,600 gp
2,300 gp
3,300 gp
5,000 gp
7,300 gp
10,900 gp
16,500 gp
25,600 gp
41,600 gp
71,000 gp
98,000 gp

51

18833859

4121806

4121806


Gamemastery Guide

DRAWING MAPS

Once you have an idea of the scope and the challenges in your adventure, the next step is
to map out your adventure location, whether it’s an underground dungeon, a desert ruin,
or an undersea coral forest.
If you’re worried that you don’t have the kind of artistic
mastery to create a map, don’t be! Fundamentally, your
maps should serve your purposes, framing the flow of
action and story in a way that allows you to track the
campaign’s action and possibilities. No one expects
you to create stunning maps that look as professional
as those in published adventures. Just follow some best
practices to make your maps both interesting and clear.
So, grab the following supplies and let’s get started.
• Sheets of graph paper
• Scratch paper
• A pencil, preferably with H or 3H lead to leave a soft
mark that’s easy to erase
• An eraser
• Ink pens (optional)
• Ruler and compass (optional)
In all stages of mapmaking, don’t be frustrated by
missteps. You can always fix them later—the eraser is
your friend! Drawing or erasing too much can weaken
the paper, but you can always throw out a draft and start
again. Remind yourself that this doesn’t need to be the
most exquisite piece of art ever made—all it needs to be
is a tool for you to keep your story straight.

18833860

18833860

CREATE A LEGEND

Begin by making a list of the features your adventure site
should contain—from geographic features to the types of
rooms in a building to the monsters and traps the PC will
face—and deciding the map’s scale and orientation. The
scale, orientation, and a key for any symbols you use to
indicate features will go in the map’s legend.
The scale for your adventure maps is usually the easiest
to decide. If the map is meant to be usable for combat
on a grid, where 1 inch equals 5 feet, you can assume
each square of your graph paper equals 5 feet. If you
are mapping a larger area, you could use each square to
represent 10 feet or even more.
For the orientation, draw an arrow toward the north,
write an “N” above the arrow’s point, and you’re done.
The key of the various details your map depicts is less
predictable. Once you’ve decided what features your map
should include—such as monsters, secret doors, and traps
for a dungeon, or settlements and ruins for a regional
map—think of a symbol to represent each feature on the
map. You can also use the symbols in the sample map.

START SKETCHING

Now that you have your legend, it’s time to start the map.
Grab a pencil and begin sketching your adventure site.

If you’re drawing a dungeon complex, start by detailing the
corridors and rooms. If you’re creating an outdoor area,
begin with any bodies of water, rivers, and topography.
No matter what you are drawing, do so with soft lines
so you can easily erase—you might make mistakes, or
you might have better ideas later in the process. As your
map starts to take shape, start populating it with features
matching the symbols you’ve designated in your map key.
Try not to overcomplicate your maps. Keeping your
map as simple as possible will make sure important
details stand out and aids in the map’s legibility.
When sketching your maps—especially when drawing
areas of wilderness or buildings—pull inspiration from
the real world. An internet search will turn up reference
images that can help when you’re deciding the placement
of trees and shapes of canyons and streams, or when
you’re replicating ancient, medieval, renaissance, or
fantasy architecture. Basing your terrain and buildings
on these references will help your creation seem more
natural and believable.
When you draw dungeons and similar adventure
sites, remember the size of the creatures that live in your
complex, and give them enough room to live and move
around. In other words, make sure the ancient black dragon
fits through the entrance to its lair! Second, avoid empty
rooms, and don’t put rooms in just to have them. Each
room should have a purpose. Maybe it’s an abandoned
purpose, but each time you create a chamber, ask yourself,
“Why was this room built?” Lastly, avoid symmetrical or
just plain dull structures. Part of the fun of exploring is
being surprised by what you find, and needless symmetry
and repetitive layouts can ruin that surprise.

4121806

NUMBER ENCOUNTER AREAS

The next step is to number the encounter areas. You can
then use that numbering system in your encounter notes.
If you are designing multiple sites, or many levels of a
massive dungeon, consider adding a letter designation
before your numbering. The first area of your first site
can be A1, while the first area of your next site can be
B1, and so on.

ADD DEFINITION

With your map sketched and keyed, you can solidify your
sketches with either darker pencil strokes or ink. This
allows you to preserve your map so you can rerun the
adventure or reuse the map for a different adventure. If
you’re feeling artistically inspired, you can color your map
with colored pencils, marker, or paint.

52

18833860

4121807

4121807


Gamemastery Basics

SAMPLE MAP

1
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18833861

18833861

4121807

53

18833861

4121808

4121808


Gamemastery Guide

18833862

18833862

4121808

54

18833862

4121809

4121809

18833863

18833863


Tools

CHAPTER 2: TOOLS

While the Core Rulebook provides all the tools you need to be a Game Master, you may
want resources to create original game content, whether it be new items, unique creatures,
or a sprawling new world for adventurers to explore.
This chapter provides a variety of tools to help you quickly and easily build
your own elements for your game, as well as some special types of rules you can
incorporate in your game, such as more hazards and strange magic items. This
chapter is organized into the following sections.
• Building Creatures (page 56) demonstrates a top-down approach for
quickly and easily constructing the creatures and NPCs you want or need
for any possible situation in your game.
• Building Hazards (page 74) gives rules and advice for creating your own
brand‑new hazards.
• Building Items (page 82) teaches you how to create new pieces of treasure
to delight your PCs.
• Item Quirks (page 86) introduces simple but memorable quirks that you
can use to quickly personalize an item and make its nature seem just as
unique and exciting as its special abilities.
• Intelligent Items (page 88) includes rules for creating items with a mind of
their own that are characters in their own right, as well as several examples
to get you started.
• Cursed Items (page 90) examines items that have a nasty drawback or
might be altogether unpleasant. The section includes specific cursed items
and a list of curses you can add to an existing item, akin to a rune.
• Relics (page 94) are special magic items that increase in power along with
the PCs, and that you and your players work together to build and enhance.
• Artifacts (page 106) are the most powerful and story-rich magic items in
the game, and can only be destroyed in a specific way.
• Gems and Art Objects (page 114) expands the diversity of monetary awards
given to PCs and includes 100 sample art objects.
• Afflictions (page 116) provides a plethora of curses, diseases, and drugs for
use in your games, as well as drug and addiction rules useful in creating
your own afflictions.
• Building Worlds (page 122) explains how to go about building your own
entire world or setting from scratch. This section leads into the next three,
which provide tools to help you flesh out the finer details of specific parts
of your game world.
• Nations (page 130) includes a system to quickly encapsulate a nation in a
stat block that contains all the information you need.
• Settlements (page 132) covers everything from tiny villages to incredible
metropolises. The section explains the settlement’s role in a game and
provides a system to describe a settlement in a stat block with all the
important information.
• Planes (page 136) includes the various planar traits you can use to build
your own planes, and explores all the planes of reality in the Age of Lost
Omens setting as well.
It’s up to you to determine how much of your game you want to customize.
Many GMs use the default rules and creatures, and set their adventures on
Golarion or another published game world. Other GMs devise and incorporate
all-new creatures and places with strange themes that don’t fit in the standard
Pathfinder game or world. Unless you’re building your entire game world from
scratch, you can usually wait to implement any new rules creation until you
think you’ll need it for your next session.

BUILDING VERSUS MODIFYING
Many times, a small adjustment
to an existing creature, item,
adventure, or other part of the
game can serve you just as well
as building something brand new.
Before you delve into creating your
own new content, ask yourself
a few questions. First, does
something similar already exist?
When answering this question,
look beyond the surface level.
Maybe you want a 5th-level clawed
centipede creature that can make
Attacks of Opportunity and that
regenerates unless hit by acid or
fire damage. It might not look very
much like a troll on the surface, but
the statistics for a troll are going to
get you most or all the way there.
Ask yourself what you’ll need to
change between your idea and the
existing material. This will help you
decide between using the original
rule with minimal modification,
using the original with adjustments,
starting with the original as a
framework to build your own, or
just starting from scratch. Finally,
ask yourself how much time you
have to prepare the content, what
overall impact you expect it to
have in your campaign, and how
important any discrepancies from
existing material are to the core
concept. The less important an
element is to your game, or the less
time you’ll be using it at the table,
the more likely you should modify
something that already exists.

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121809

55

18833863

4121810

4121810


Gamemastery Guide

BUILDING CREATURES

Making your own creatures fleshes out your game world and lets you introduce concepts not yet
available in published products like the Bestiary volumes. These guidelines help you customize
creatures to your specifications and explore your imagination. From strange beasts to canny
political rivals, you have the power to design creatures that fit the narrative needs of your story.
Creatures aren’t built the same way PCs are. The rules for
building them are more flexible, and their statistics are
based on benchmark final numbers rather than combining
each individual modifier together. This is called top-down
design, in which you consider the design process as a
whole and select the details that reflect your intended
result, rather than building statistics from the bottom up
and hoping the finished creature matches your vision.
This guide provides a step-by-step process to build
creatures, but as you get more comfortable with creature
creation, you may prefer to use different methods. You
could start with one ability you think is cool, or you might
look to create a spellcaster of a certain type. There’s no
wrong starting place or wrong way to compile and present
your creation; some GMs prefer to generate a stat block
that is as similar to an official Bestiary entry as possible,
while others prefer to compile just a brief set of notes.

DEVELOP THE CONCEPT

To begin making a creature, you should first come up
with its concept. You likely already have the basic idea. As
you add details to the general idea, taking notes can help
keep your creature on track. Consider the parts of your
creature you find most compelling and that you want
to emphasize when the creature hits the table. For
example, in the Bestiary, demons are creatures of
sin, and are designed to have weaknesses against
specific virtues that oppose them. Harpies
enchant creatures by singing, represented by their
centerpiece ability, Captivating Song. Note your
creature’s core aspects, and if you feel uncertain
later, you can look back and ask yourself, “Does
this emphasize a core aspect or not?”
Next, look at the creature’s role in your game.
Is it meant to be a combatant? A social creature?
A trusted ally? Figuring this out will help you
determine whether to give it strong combat abilities
or to focus on skills, spells, and special abilities. Think about
how the creature might behave if it’s in a fight, if someone
tries to talk to it, or if it’s in a social situation. Does it work
better alone or with allies? What sort of character should be
best at facing it or be particularly weak against it?
Consider also the complexity of the creature. This
matters most when you plan to use a large number of
creatures of that type. If you’ll use five at the same time,
you’ll want their turns to move swiftly and avoid complex
special actions. A creature likely to face a group of PCs alone
can have more abilities, and it might need a more versatile

18833864

18833864

4121810

56

18833864

4121811

4121811

18833865

18833865


Tools

BUILDING CREATURES OVERVIEW
This section details the creature-building process using the
following steps.
1. Develop the Concept (page 56) Think about your creature,
and make notes you can use in future steps.
2. Build the Stat Block Pick all the statistics for the creatures,
going through the list below.

3. Design Abilities (page 67) Create the special abilities your
creature can use.
4. Review Holistically (page 69) Step back, take stock of
your creature as a whole, and tweak as needed.

Level (page 58)
Alignment, Size, and Traits (page 58)
Ability Modifiers (page 59)
Perception and Senses (page 60)
Languages (page 60)
Skills (page 60)
Items, if necessary (page 61)
AC (page 61)
Saving Throws (page 62)
Hit Points (page 62)
Immunities, Weaknesses, and Resistances (page 63)
Speed (page 64)
Strikes, including their damage (page 64)
Spells, if necessary (page 65)

This section provides the abilities conveyed by certain traits,
such as demon, dragon, and undead. You’ll also find abilities
typical of creatures with those traits to help guide you as
you plan your creatures.

set of defenses against PC tactics. Cut complexity as much
as you can while retaining your desired theme.
Now, how do you want an encounter with this creature
to feel? Should it be scary? Mobile? Confusing? A mystical
duel or a knock-down, drag-out fight? What can you give
your creature to convey those characteristics? Note that
much of this feel will come from your choice of the creature’s
special abilities or spells, rather than its raw numbers.
With all this in mind, think about the specific abilities
your creature should have. Take a few notes now, and get
to the details later. You can use abilities from the Bestiary
or feats in the Core Rulebook, adjusting as needed, to save
yourself time. It helps to think of a creature that’s similar to
yours and see what makes it tick—and what you can steal
from it. Maybe you can just reskin that creature (page 58),
instead of making a new one from scratch.
Now that you understand your creature’s concept, it’s
time to get to the statistics. Remember that you can always
change your concept later on. Your creation might evolve
and transform as you go, so be open to change and revisions.

High: Extremely capable but not world class, the
creature presents a challenge for most characters. Just
about all creatures have at least one high value. Most
combat-focused creatures have high AC and either a high
attack bonus and high damage, or a merely moderate
attack bonus but extreme damage. An ogre warrior’s
attack bonus and a kobold scout’s Stealth are high values.
Moderate: A middle-of-the road statistic can cover
anything unremarkable about the creature. Use this
one often.
Low: The creature is actively bad at this. Choose these
intentionally to represent the creature’s weak points.
Most creatures should have at least one low statistic; an
example is the goblin pyro’s Will save.
Terrible: Some statistics can dip even lower than low,
to terrible. This indicates a truly awful statistic that
still isn’t game-breakingly bad. A spider’s Intelligence is
terrible, as is a dero stalker’s Will save.

UNDERSTANDING AND
CHOOSING STATISTICS

Most of the statistics in this section use a scale of extreme,
high, moderate, and low—some use terrible values as well.
Extreme: The creature is world class in this statistic
and can challenge almost any character. Most creatures
have no extreme statistics or only one extreme statistic,
although some creatures might have additional extreme
statistics and weaker related statistics elsewhere (a
common example being a creature trading accuracy for
extreme damage). Examples from the Bestiary include the
succubus’s Diplomacy and the lich’s spell DC.

TRAIT ABILITIES (PAGE 70)

DESIGNING NPCS (PAGE 72)
Sometimes you’ll design a creature that’s meant to have
abilities or characteristics similar to those of a PC. Maybe
you need a bold champion, a sly rogue master criminal, or
a wizened druid elder for your game. You also might need
a common baker, who has little combat ability but great
skill with dough and an oven. This section provides ways
you might modify aspects of the creature-building process
to fit those needs.

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121811

PUSH AND PULL
When it comes to statistics, a creature should be balanced
overall. That means if you’re giving a creature an extreme
statistic, it should have some low or terrible statistics to
compensate. For example, if you were making a creature
extremely hard to hit by giving it an extreme AC, you’d
likely give it lower saving throws or low HP. If a creature
is great at spellcasting, it might need several low statistics
to be a balanced challenge. There’s no perfect system for
making these decisions. If you’ve made a creature that has
four high stats and nothing low, or vice-versa, take another
look. A creature’s strengths and weaknesses change the
PCs’ strategies for dealing with it, and that’s what makes
playing the game fun!

57

18833865

4121812

4121812


Gamemastery Guide

RESKINNING A CREATURE
Sometimes you need a creature with abilities that are almost
exactly the same as those of a published creature. In that case,
it can be more efficient to simply “reskin” the old creature
rather than design a new one—that is, to change the description
but keep the abilities mostly the same. Occasionally reskinning
requires small mechanical adjustments. For instance, a fire cat
that has immunity to fire, an aura that deals fire damage, and
the ability to light people on fire with its jaws to deal persistent
fire damage could be reskinned as a caustic animate tree that
has immunity to acid, an aura that deals acid damage, and
branch attacks that smear acidic sap on a creature’s body
when they hit, dealing persistent acid damage.

At the higher levels of the game, PCs have more tools at
their disposal, so the creatures they face need to hit back
harder! At higher levels, give each creature more extreme
statistics. Having one extreme statistic becomes typical
around 11th level. A creature of 15th level or higher
typically has two extreme statistics, and one of 20th level
or higher should have three or four. Keep in mind that these
should be relevant to the encounters you expect them to
have—extreme social skills aren’t much use to a combatfocused creature. Be careful about giving multiple extreme
statistics that are closely linked: a creature with extreme
damage and Fortitude saves is one thing, but having an
extreme attack bonus and extreme damage allows the
creature to apply both extreme statistics to each attack.

LEVEL

For most creatures you build, their level depends on the level
of the party who will encounter it. Look at other creatures
you think are similar in power to yours to determine its
level. Note that level represents a creature’s combat ability,
so a creature that’s more social might have, for example,
3rd-level combat statistics and 6th-level skills but remain
a 3rd-level creature. Most such creatures are NPCs; for
more information on this distinction and how to use it, see
Non-Combat Level on page 72.
Some abilities are hard for PCs to deal with at low
levels. For instance, creatures that can fly and have ranged
attacks should typically appear around 7th level, when
PCs gain access to flight. Natural invisibility or at-will
invisibility as an innate spell should come at around 6th
level, when PCs are more likely to prepare see invisibility
in lower-level spell slots, or 8th level, when some PCs get
the Blind-Fight feat.
The tables in this chapter go up to 24th level—the
highest-level extreme encounter a party might face.

18833866

18833866

EXTREME INCREASES

4121812

ALIGNMENT, SIZE, AND
TRAITS

Fill out the trait line of your creature’s stat block. The
alignment can be whatever suits your story, though some
types of creatures must be or tend to be certain alignments.
Creatures can be whatever size you need them to be,
though you seldom find Large creatures below 1st level,
Huge creatures below 5th level, or Gargantuan creatures
below 10th level. Generally, you don’t automatically
adjust statistics for size, except for an exception to
Strength modifiers for Large and bigger creatures, which
you’ll find in Ability Modifiers on the next page.
Your creature will almost certainly have one of the
following traits to define its type: aberration, animal, astral,
beast, celestial, construct, dragon, elemental, ethereal, fey,
fiend, fungus, giant, humanoid, monitor, ooze, plant, or
undead. If you’re making a creature from an existing
category of a type, such as demon, it also has
that category as a trait. Creatures with a close

58

18833866

4121813

4121813

18833867

18833867


Tools

affinity to elements—air, earth, fire, and water—or types of
energy—like acid, cold, and electricity—have those traits.
Some abilities typical of creatures with the traits listed
above can be found in Trait Abilities on page 70. As with
the other steps, looking at similar creatures will give you
an idea of what traits to use.
Add any traits that have detailed rules attached to
them, like amphibious, aquatic, incorporeal, mindless, and
swarm. You can add traits related to the creature category,
such as dinosaur or werecreature, but most of these traits
are pretty self-evident in play. If at any point you realize
during play that you didn’t add a trait the creature really
should have, you can usually apply it retroactively.

ABILITY MODIFIERS

Next, figure out your creature’s ability modifiers, since
these will suggest what their other statistics should be.
You don’t have to determine the exact numbers, but it’s
good to avoid creating creatures whose ability modifiers
are at odds with their abilities, like creatures with a terrible
Wisdom modifier and very high Perception. Most of the
time, you’ll just be using ability modifiers for untrained
skills, so they’re useful as a guide but not crucial.
Table 2–1 shows some benchmarks for your creatures.
Use high for the creature’s best ability modifiers,
moderate for ones they’re okay at, and low for the rest.
If a creature has a truly bad ability, you can go as low
as –5. That’s the terrible range for ability modifiers, and
doesn’t really change by level. This is most common with
animals, which have an Intelligence modifier of –4 (for
dogs, dolphins, and such) or –5 (for more instinctual
animals like spiders), and for mindless creatures, which
have a –5 Intelligence modifier.
Few creatures use the extreme column. A powerful,
dedicated spellcaster might use an extreme spellcasting
statistic, or a preternaturally charming creature like a
succubus or nymph might have an extreme Charisma
modifier. However, the most common way extreme
numbers are used is for really big, really strong creatures.
This happens with only Large or larger creatures from
1st to 5th level, only Huge or larger creatures from 6th
to 9th level, and only Gargantuan creatures from 10th to
15th level. Beyond that level, a creature doesn’t gain an
extreme Strength modifier from size alone.

TABLE 2–1: ABILITY MODIFIER SCALES
Level
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Extreme
—
—
+5
+5
+5
+6
+6
+7
+7

High
+3
+3
+4
+4
+4
+5
+5
+5
+6

Moderate
+2
+2
+3
+3
+3
+3
+4
+4
+4

Low
+0
+0
+1
+1
+1
+2
+2
+2
+2

BASE ROAD MAPS
You can use the following suggestions to set the baseline when
creating your road map. For example, use brute for a big, tough
creature like an ogre, and skirmisher for a darting enemy. Each
entry is a starting point you can customize as you see fit. Any
core statistic that isn’t listed should typically use moderate
numbers. You can set ability modifiers and add additional
abilities as needed. To make a creature that resembles a
character of a certain class, see Class Road maps on page 73.
Brute low Perception; high or extreme Str modifier, high
to moderate Con modifier, low or lower Dex and mental
modifiers; moderate or low AC; high Fortitude, low Reflex or
Will or both; high HP; high attack bonus and high damage
or moderate attack bonus and extreme damage
Magical Striker high attack and high damage; moderate
to high spell DCs; either a scattering of innate spells or
prepared or spontaneous spells up to half the creature’s
level (rounded up) minus 1
Skill Paragon high or extreme ability modifier matching
its best skills; typically high Reflex or Will and low
Fortitude; many skills at moderate or high and potentially
one or two extreme skills; at least one special ability to use
the creature’s skills in combat
Skirmisher high Dex modifier; low Fortitude, high Reflex;
higher Speed than typical
Sniper high Perception; high Dex modifier; low Fortitude,
high Reflex; moderate to low HP; ranged Strikes have high
attack bonus and damage or moderate attack bonus and
extreme damage (melee Strikes are weaker)
Soldier high Str modifier; high to extreme AC; high
Fortitude; high attack bonus and high damage; Attack of
Opportunity or other tactical abilities
Spellcaster high or extreme modifier for the corresponding
mental ability; low Fortitude, high Will; low HP; low attack
bonus and moderate or low damage; high or extreme spell
DCs; prepared or spontaneous spells up to half the creature’s
level (rounded up)

8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

+7
+7
+8
+8
+8
+9
+9
+9
+10
+10
+10
+11
+11
+11
+11
+11
+13

+6
+6
+7
+7
+7
+8
+8
+8
+9
+9
+9
+10
+10
+10
+10
+10
+12

+4
+4
+5
+5
+5
+5
+5
+6
+6
+6
+6
+6
+7
+7
+8
+8
+9

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121813

+3
+3
+3
+3
+4
+4
+4
+4
+5
+5
+5
+5
+6
+6
+6
+6
+7

59

18833867

4121814

4121814


Gamemastery Guide

CONVERTING FIRST EDITION CREATURES
If you’re converting creatures from First Edition, you won’t
find a direct numerical conversion. Instead, use the original
statistics to create your road map, giving a better AC to a
creature that had a good AC in First Edition, and so on.
Here are the main areas of difference that you’ll want to
keep in mind for your conversion.
• Ability modifiers scale differently, so don’t copy them over
exactly. The highest modifiers tend not to get as high in
Second Edition. You’ll rarely see a +10 Strength modifier,
for example. Creatures also tend to get better low
statistics at higher levels than they used to, particularly
for Dexterity and Wisdom. This is most evident in
high‑level First Edition creatures with awful Dexterity.
• Low-Intelligence creatures, particularly animals, tend to
have more special actions than they would have in First
Edition. This is to make encounters with them more
dynamic and distinct. Compare dinosaurs between the
editions for good examples.
• When converting spell-like abilities to innate spells, you
might need to make some substitutions. Some spells will
appear as heightened versions of spells (such as greater
dispel magic now being heightened dispel magic), but
others will require you to find something different. Also,
don’t feel like you need to keep every spell; focus on the
most thematic and potent ones. The Spells section on
page 65 has more advice on this subject.
• Damage reduction has been replaced with two options:
resistance to all damage (possibly with exceptions), or
more HP and a weakness. Immunities, Weaknesses, and
Resistances on page 63 describes the distinction.
• If you want to convert spell resistance, you can give the
creature a +1 status bonus to all saves against magic, or
+2 if it had abnormally high spell resistance for its level.

18833868

18833868

PERCEPTION

Perception is a fairly straightforward statistic. Use Wisdom
as a guide for setting it, and adjust to the high side if your
creature has acute senses or extra training. If your creature
has low Wisdom, for example, it would probably have a
low Perception modifier, or moderate if it’s supposed to
be a great hunter. Don’t make your creature’s Perception
higher just because it’s often used for initiative; creatures
with poor Perception could use a skill check for initiative
instead, such as Stealth.

SENSES
Choose or design any special senses for your creature, such
as low-light vision, darkvision, or scent. If you’re making
a sense from scratch, simply decide what it senses, whether
it has a range limit, and whether it’s precise or imprecise.
For example, a sinspawn (Bestiary 297) has “sin scent
(imprecise) 30 feet.” This means it can smell creatures
bearing its associated sin if they’re within 30 feet, and the
sense is imprecise—about as acute as human hearing.

TABLE 2–2: PERCEPTION
Level
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

Extreme
+9
+10
+11
+12
+14
+15
+17
+18
+20
+21
+23
+24
+26
+27
+29
+30
+32
+33
+35
+36
+38
+39
+41
+43
+44
+46

High
+8
+9
+10
+11
+12
+14
+15
+17
+18
+19
+21
+22
+24
+25
+26
+28
+29
+30
+32
+33
+35
+36
+38
+39
+40
+42

Moderate
+5
+6
+7
+8
+9
+11
+12
+14
+15
+16
+18
+19
+21
+22
+23
+25
+26
+28
+29
+30
+32
+33
+35
+36
+37
+38

Low
+2
+3
+4
+5
+6
+8
+9
+11
+12
+13
+15
+16
+18
+19
+20
+22
+23
+25
+26
+27
+29
+30
+32
+33
+34
+36

Terrible
+0
+1
+2
+3
+4
+6
+7
+8
+10
+11
+12
+14
+15
+16
+18
+19
+20
+22
+23
+24
+26
+27
+28
+30
+31
+32

4121814

LANGUAGES

Think about what languages the creature would need
to communicate with other creatures in its home. For
instance, many intelligent undead speak Necril, and many
creatures from the Darklands speak Undercommon. If you
want your creature to be able to speak to the PCs, be sure
it has Common; for a creature with no reason to speak the
common tongue of your setting (such as most extraplanar
creatures in a typical campaign), be sure it doesn’t. Some
creatures can understand language but can’t vocalize; in this
case, you can state that they can’t speak any language. For
creatures that need to be able to infiltrate and communicate
wherever they go, you might give them tongues or a similar
ability as a constant innate spell.

SKILLS

You have lots of flexibility in setting your creature’s skills.
Pick some skills you think are appropriate, and consider
how good the creature is at them. High skills are roughly
on par with a specialized PC of the creature’s level, though
they could be a little lower or higher. Most creatures have
at least one high skill, but no more than three. The best
skills should go with the best ability modifiers, and you
might even want to estimate the creature’s proficiency rank
for these skills. Some skills can get a high bonus for free to
fit the creature’s theme, particularly Lore skills.

60

18833868

4121815

4121815

18833869

18833869


Tools

Most creatures don’t have an extreme skill unless
they are world class for their level, like a succubus’s
Diplomacy. Having an extreme skill is less impactful than
an extreme AC or attack bonus, but still might warrant a
sacrifice elsewhere, especially if the creature also has more
high skills than usual. There’s no need for terrible skill
modifiers, since an untrained skill usually represents that.

TABLE 2–3: SKILLS
Level
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

Extreme
+8
+9
+10
+11
+13
+15
+16
+18
+20
+21
+23
+25
+26
+28
+30
+31
+33
+35
+36
+38
+40
+41
+43
+45
+46
+48

High
+5
+6
+7
+8
+10
+12
+13
+15
+17
+18
+20
+22
+23
+25
+27
+28
+30
+32
+33
+35
+37
+38
+40
+42
+43
+45

Moderate
+4
+5
+6
+7
+9
+10
+12
+13
+15
+16
+18
+19
+21
+22
+24
+25
+27
+28
+30
+31
+33
+34
+36
+37
+38
+40

Low
+2 to +1
+3 to +2
+4 to +3
+5 to +4
+7 to +5
+8 to +7
+10 to +8
+11 to +9
+13 to +11
+14 to +12
+16 to +13
+17 to +15
+19 to +16
+20 to +17
+22 to +19
+23 to +20
+25 to +21
+26 to +23
+28 to +24
+29 to +25
+31 to +27
+32 to +28
+34 to +29
+35 to +31
+36 to +32
+38 to +33

SPECIAL MODIFIERS
You can also add special, thematic modifiers for certain
skill uses. For instance, you might give a creature that
secretes adhesive “Athletics +7 (+9 to Climb or Grab).”
This special bonus should still remain at or below the
extreme number, especially if it has a combat purpose like
the Grab bonus above.

ITEMS

If you gave a creature gear equivalent to a PC, your PCs
would gain a huge amount of treasure by defeating a
large group of them. Using Table 2–4: Safe Items can help
you avoid that. A creature can have a single permanent
item of the listed level without issue. For example, if
a 6th-level creature has a +1 weapon, that item’s not
worth so much that the PCs would be massively rich if
they encountered many creatures of that type and sold
everything they found. You can give a creature several
lower-level items too. Just pay attention to your overall

IMPROVISING A CREATURE
As you get more experienced, you might find that you don’t
need to build some creatures in advance. In many cases,
especially for simple creatures, you can just select values from
the relevant tables on the fly and track its HP. When you do,
track which value you used as it came up. For instance, let’s
say you’re improvising a 2nd-level kobold soldier. When it’s
time for initiative, you decide it has moderate Perception and
jot down “Per +8.” Your group’s fighter beats it at initiative and
attacks. You decide the soldier has high AC—looking at Table
2–5, you see that’s 18—and add this information to your note.
The fighter’s Strike hits, and you select the low end of high HP:
36. Well, now it’s 25. Your note says “Per +8, AC 18, HP 25.” If
it gets to take a turn, you can give it a Strike then.

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery

treasure as measured against the guidelines on pages
508–510 of the Core Rulebook. At the lowest levels, a
creature can certainly have multiple level 0 items, even
though normally a creature should have only one item of
the level listed in the Safe Item Level column.
Specific creatures or NPCs have more leeway to break
these guidelines because you can plan the rest of your
adventure’s loot around them. Also, giving a boss villain
a powerful magic item makes the fight and its aftermath
more interesting.

GLOSSARY
and INDEX

TABLE 2–4: SAFE ITEMS
Creature Level
3 or lower
4–5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

4121815

Safe Item Level
0
1
2 (+1 weapon)
3
4 (+1 striking weapon)
5 (+1 armor)
6
7
8 (+1 resilient armor)
9
10 (+2 striking weapon)
11 (+2 resilient armor)
12 (+2 greater striking weapon)
13
14 (+2 greater resilient armor)
15
16 (+3 greater striking weapon)
17
18 (+3 greater resilient armor)
19 (+3 major striking weapon)
20 (+3 major resilient armor)

ARMOR CLASS

Because AC is one of the most important combat stats,
you need to be more careful with setting this number
for any creature you expect will end up in a fight. Low
AC typically fits spellcasters, who compensate with their

61

18833869

4121816

4121816


Gamemastery Guide

Extreme saves often pair with extreme or high ability
modifiers. Almost no creature should have more than one
extreme save, even at high levels. Assign terrible saves to
creatures that have a clear weak point—for example, a
nearly immobile creature would have a terrible Reflex save.

TABLE 2–5: ARMOR CLASS

TABLE 2–6: SAVING THROWS

Level
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

18833870

18833870

selection of powerful spells. Most creatures use high or
moderate AC—high is comparable to what a PC fighter
would have. Reserve extreme AC for a creature that is even
better defended; these values are for creatures that have
defenses similar in power to those of a champion or monk.

Extreme
18
19
19
21
22
24
25
27
28
30
31
33
34
36
37
39
40
42
43
45
46
48
49
51
52
54

High
15
16
16
18
19
21
22
24
25
27
28
30
31
33
34
36
37
39
40
42
43
45
46
48
49
51

Moderate
14
15
15
17
18
20
21
23
24
26
27
29
30
32
33
35
36
38
39
41
42
44
45
47
48
50

Low
12
13
13
15
16
18
19
21
22
24
25
27
28
30
31
33
34
36
37
39
40
42
43
45
46
48

COMPENSATING WITH HP AND SAVES
You might adjust your creature’s HP, AC, and saves in
tandem. Almost no creature has great defenses in all areas,
as such creatures often result in frustrating fights. A creature
with higher AC might have fewer HP and weaker saves,
and one that’s easy to hit could have more HP and a strong
Fortitude to compensate. This depends on the theme of the
creature. An extreme AC might mean reducing the creature’s
HP to the next lowest category, or reducing its HP by a
smaller amount and making another reduction elsewhere.

SAVING THROWS

You can often set saves quickly by assigning one high, one
moderate, and one low modifier. Some creatures might vary
from this, either because they have poor AC but better saves
or because they should thematically have multiple good
saves and compensate elsewhere. You have more flexibility
with saves, and having one save off the listed number by 1
is rarely a big deal. Pay attention to the creature’s Con, Dex,
and Wis modifiers—these don’t have to correspond to the
creature’s saves exactly, but should inform your choices.

Level
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

Extreme
+9
+10
+11
+12
+14
+15
+17
+18
+20
+21
+23
+24
+26
+27
+29
+30
+32
+33
+35
+36
+38
+39
+41
+43
+44
+46

High
+8
+9
+10
+11
+12
+14
+15
+17
+18
+19
+21
+22
+24
+25
+26
+28
+29
+30
+32
+33
+35
+36
+38
+39
+40
+42

Moderate
+5
+6
+7
+8
+9
+11
+12
+14
+15
+16
+18
+19
+21
+22
+23
+25
+26
+28
+29
+30
+32
+33
+35
+36
+37
+38

Low
+2
+3
+4
+5
+6
+8
+9
+11
+12
+13
+15
+16
+18
+19
+20
+22
+23
+25
+26
+27
+29
+30
+32
+33
+34
+36

Terrible
+0
+1
+2
+3
+4
+6
+7
+8
+10
+11
+12
+14
+15
+16
+18
+19
+20
+22
+23
+24
+26
+27
+28
+30
+31
+32

4121816

HIT POINTS

Give a creature HP in the moderate range unless its theme
strongly suggests it should use another range. Spellcasters,
for example, often have low HP. Brutish creatures usually
have high HP, compensating with lower AC, weaker saves,
few tactical options, or other limitations. As mentioned in
the Armor Class section above, you don’t want a creature
with extreme AC to have high HP too.
Hit Points are closely tied in with immunities,
weaknesses, and resistances, so if your creature has any of
those, look at that section before finalizing HP (page 63).

REGENERATION AND HEALING ABILITIES
Your creature might have regeneration, fast healing, or
some other ability to heal itself. These healing abilities
can greatly affect the flow of a fight. Regeneration or fast
healing heals some number of hits each round—usually
one to one and a half hits. To determine the number of Hit
Points it should restore, look at the high damage value on
Table 2–10: Strike Damage (page 65) and multiply that
value by the number of hits healed. For instance, if the

62

18833870

4121817

4121817

18833871

18833871


Tools

high damage is 20, regeneration between 20 to 30 makes
sense. The value should be higher if the regeneration is easy
to overcome—and remember that most regeneration gets
easier to overcome at higher levels. Also, you might want to
decrease the creature’s total HP by double its regeneration
value. Fast healing follows the same rules, but because it
can’t prevent a creature’s death and there isn’t always have
a way to deactivate it, you might want to give the creature
more HP instead of fast healing to keep things simple.
If a creature can use an ability that heals it, that ability
typically restores more HP since it costs actions. An at‑will
healing ability should be based on a heal spell 2 levels
lower than the highest-level spell a creature of that level
could ordinarily cast (for example, an 11th-level creature
can typically cast up to 6th-level spells, so you would base
its healing ability on a 4th-level heal spell). If the ability
both deals damage and heals, use that same baseline scale
from above but with vampiric touch instead of heal.

TABLE 2–7: HIT POINTS
Level
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

High
9
20–17
26–24
40–36
59–53
78–72
97–91
123–115
148–140
173–165
198–190
223–215
248–240
273–265
298–290
323–315
348–340
373–365
398–390
423–415
448–440
473–465
505–495
544–532
581–569
633–617

Moderate
8–7
16–14
21–19
32–28
48–42
63–57
78–72
99–91
119–111
139–131
159–151
179–171
199–191
219–211
239–231
259–251
279–271
299–291
319–311
339–331
359–351
379–371
405–395
436–424
466–454
508–492

IMMUNITIES,
WEAKNESSES, AND
RESISTANCES

Low
6–5
13–11
16–14
25–21
37–31
48–42
59–53
75–67
90–82
105–97
120–112
135–127
150–142
165–157
180–172
195–187
210–202
225–217
240–232
255–247
270–262
285–277
305–295
329–317
351–339
383–367

If it’s highly thematic for a creature to have an immunity,
weakness, or resistance, consider adding it. Table 2–8 lists
the ranges for weaknesses and resistances by level.
Immunities are generally reserved for creatures made
of an unusual substance (like a fire elemental being

immune to fire). You can also give an immunity if a
creature’s biology or construction would logically cause
it to be unaffected (like a mindless creature’s immunity
to mental effects).
If the creature should be hard to affect with something
but the conditions above aren’t true, give it a resistance
instead. For instance, a giant octopus isn’t actually made
of cold water, so it wouldn’t be immune to cold, but its
life in the ocean depths make it resistant to cold. You’ll
typically use the lower end of the value on Table 2–8 for
a broad resistance that applies to a wide range of effects,
like “physical 5 (except silver)” and the higher end for
something narrower, like a single damage type. A creature
with a resistance, especially a broad resistance or a physical
resistance, usually has fewer HP.
Giving your creature a weakness adds flavor to it and
greatly rewards effective player tactics once your players
identify the weakness. The weakness should apply to one
damage type or phenomenon and use the high end of the
scale. Creatures typically have at most one weakness. If a
creature has a weakness, especially to something common,
give it additional HP. The amount of additional HP might
depend on how tough the creature should feel if the PCs
don’t exploit its weakness; a tough creature might have
additional HP equal to quadruple the weakness value.
A creature with a hard-to-exploit weakness might have
additional HP equal to the weakness value or less.

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121817

TABLE 2–8: RESISTANCES AND WEAKNESSES
Level
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

Maximum
1
3
3
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26

Minimum
1
1
2
2
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
7
7
8
8
9
9
9
10
10
11
11
12
12
13
13

63

18833871

4121818

4121818


Gamemastery Guide

The combination of more HP and a weakness has a
different feel from standard HP with resistances. If the
creature being an impervious tank really fits its theme, use
a resistance with an exception, such as “physical 5 (except
silver).” If, however, it makes more sense for normal hits
to get through and the creature to simply have great
staying power, use more HP and a weakness. Skeletons
and zombies are a good example of the difference between
these styles. Skeletons have resistances because they’re
bony and hard to hurt. Zombies, on the other hand, have
more HP and a weakness to slashing damage—they’re
tougher, but their bodies aren’t built to deflect weapon
attacks, and slashing attacks can rip them up quickly.

SPEED

Your creature’s Speed should be 25 feet if it moves like a
human. Beyond that, you can set the Speed to whatever
makes sense. Remember that the creature can move up to
triple this number if it spends its whole turn moving, so
if you want the PCs to be able to chase the creature, its
Speed can be only so high. Creatures at higher levels need
ways to deal with flying PCs, speedy PCs, and PCs with
more efficient actions that let them engage and retreat
more easily. This might mean adding a fly Speed, giving
the creature ranged attacks, and so forth.
Creatures can have climb and swim Speeds even at
low levels. While you can give your creature a fly Speed
at those low levels, it’s better to wait until around 7th
level (when PCs gain access to fly) to give your creature a
fly Speed if it also has ranged attacks or another way to
harry the PCs from a distance indefinitely.

18833872

18833872

STRIKES

When building your creature’s selection of Strikes, use
the following sections to set the Strike’s attack bonus
and damage. Give the attack all the normal traits if it’s a
weapon; for unarmed attacks or weapons you invent, give
whatever traits you feel are appropriate. Note that these
traits might influence the damage you give the Strike.
You might want to make sure a creature has an unarmed
attack if you think it’s likely to get disarmed. At 7th level
and higher, PCs might have the ability to fly, which makes
it more important for creatures to have decent ranged
Strikes to make sure they aren’t totally hopeless against
flying PCs (though they could instead have fast fly Speeds
or something similar).

STRIKE ATTACK BONUS
Use a high attack bonus for combat creatures—fighter
types—that also usually have high damage. A creature
could have a higher attack bonus and lower damage, or
vice versa (for instance, a moderate attack bonus and
extreme damage might fit a creature that’s more like a
barbarian), instead of having a poor statistic in another
category. Spellcasters typically have poor attack bonuses,
potentially in exchange for extreme spell DCs.

TABLE 2–9: STRIKE ATTACK BONUS
Level
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

Extreme
+10
+10
+11
+13
+14
+16
+17
+19
+20
+22
+23
+25
+27
+28
+29
+31
+32
+34
+35
+37
+38
+40
+41
+43
+44
+46

High
+8
+8
+9
+11
+12
+14
+15
+17
+18
+20
+21
+23
+24
+26
+27
+29
+30
+32
+33
+35
+36
+38
+39
+41
+42
+44

Moderate
+6
+6
+7
+9
+10
+12
+13
+15
+16
+18
+19
+21
+22
+24
+25
+27
+28
+30
+31
+33
+34
+36
+37
+39
+40
+42

Low
+4
+4
+5
+7
+8
+9
+11
+12
+13
+15
+16
+17
+19
+20
+21
+23
+24
+25
+27
+28
+29
+31
+32
+33
+35
+36

4121818

STRIKE DAMAGE
Table 2–10 on the next page gives the damage a creature
should deal with a single Strike. You might use a lower
category if the creature has better accuracy, or a higher
category if its accuracy is lower.
A creature that’s meant to be primarily a combat threat
uses high damage for its melee Strikes, or moderate for
melee Strikes that have the agile trait. Ranged attacks
more typically use the moderate value, or even low. A
creature that’s meant to be highly damaging uses the
extreme damage values, but might then have a moderate
attack bonus. As with most statistics, extreme damage is
more likely at higher levels. You can also use the extreme
value for special attacks that the creature can use only
a limited number of times or under circumstances that
aren’t likely to happen every round.
More versatile creatures, such as ones that can cast
some spells and aren’t meant to primarily get their damage
through Strikes, go one category lower: moderate for
their main melee Strikes, low for agile and ranged Strikes.
Spellcasters and other creatures that aren’t meant to be
competent in a direct fight might use the low damage value,
or even less if they completely don’t care about their Strikes.
On Table 2–10, you’ll find a damage expression (a die
roll or rolls plus a flat modifier) you can use as is, or you
can take the damage in parentheses and build your own
damage expression to hit that number. If you do the latter,

64

18833872

4121819

4121819

18833873

18833873


Tools

remember that a d4 counts as 2.5 damage, a d6 as 3.5, a
d8 as 4.5, a d10 as 5.5, and a d12 as 6.5. Usually a damage
expression works best when roughly half the damage is
from dice and half is from the flat modifier. If your creature
deals special damage, like 1d6 fire from flaming attacks,
that counts toward its total damage per Strike. Keep in
mind that a creature using a weapon should have a damage
value that feels right for that weapon. Extreme damage
works well for two-handed weapons that uses d10s or d12s
for damage. On the other hand, a dagger uses only d4s, so
a dagger wielder would need something like sneak attack
to deal extreme damage, or you might compensate for the
dagger’s lower damage per Strike by giving the creature the
ability to attack more efficiently or use other tricks.

TABLE 2–10: STRIKE DAMAGE
Level

Extreme

–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

1d6+1 (4)
1d6+3 (6)
1d8+4 (8)
1d12+4 (11)
1d12+8 (15)
2d10+7 (18)
2d12+7 (20)
2d12+10 (23)
2d12+12 (25)
2d12+15 (28)
2d12+17 (30)
2d12+20 (33)
2d12+22 (35)
3d12+19 (38)
3d12+21 (40)
3d12+24 (43)
3d12+26 (45)

High

Moderate

Low

1d4+1 (3)
1d4 (3)
1d4 (2)
1d6+2 (5)
1d4+2 (4)
1d4+1 (3)
1d6+3 (6)
1d6+2 (5)
1d4+2 (4)
1d10+4 (9)
1d8+4 (8)
1d6+3 (6)
1d10+6 (12)
1d8+6 (10)
1d6+5 (8)
2d8+5 (14)
2d6+5 (12)
2d4+4 (9)
2d8+7 (16)
2d6+6 (13)
2d4+6 (11)
2d8+9 (18)
2d6+8 (15)
2d4+7 (12)
2d10+9 (20) 2d8+8 (17)
2d6+6 (13)
2d10+11 (22) 2d8+9 (18)
2d6+8 (15)
2d10+13 (24) 2d8+11 (20) 2d6+9 (16)
2d12+13 (26) 2d10+11 (22) 2d6+10 (17)
2d12+15 (28) 2d10+12 (23) 2d8+10 (19)
3d10+14 (30) 3d8+12 (25) 3d6+10 (20)
3d10+16 (32) 3d8+14 (27) 3d6+11 (21)
3d10+18 (34) 3d8+15 (28) 3d6+13 (23)
3d12+17 (36) 3d10+14 (30) 3d6+14 (24)

16 3d12+29 (48) 3d12+18 (37) 3d10+15 (31) 3d6+15 (25)
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

3d12+31 (50)
3d12+34 (53)
4d12+29 (55)
4d12+32 (58)
4d12+34 (60)
4d12+37 (63)
4d12+39 (65)
4d12+42 (68)

SPELLS

3d12+19 (38)
3d12+20 (40)
4d10+20 (42)
4d10+22 (44)
4d10+24 (46)
4d10+26 (48)
4d12+24 (50)
4d12+26 (52)

3d10+16 (32)
3d10+17 (33)
4d8+17 (35)
4d8+19 (37)
4d8+20 (38)
4d8+22 (40)
4d10+20 (42)
4d10+22 (44)

3d6+16 (26)
3d6+17 (27)
4d6+14 (28)
4d6+15 (29)
4d6+17 (31)
4d6+18 (32)
4d6+19 (33)
4d6+21 (35)

Your creature might have magical abilities that are
best represented by spells. If you’re making a highly
spellcasting-themed creature, give it prepared or
spontaneous spells. For a creature that has spells due
to its magical nature, especially if that magic isn’t its
core focus, consider giving it some innate spells instead.
How many spells you should give a creature depends on
how you expect it to spend its actions in combat. If it’s
primarily going to be making Strikes, it might not have
any spells, or it might just have a few to help it move
around better or protect against certain types of magic.

MANUFACTURED WEAPONS
As noted in Items on page 61, most creatures have less treasure
than PCs, so those that rely on manufactured weapons are
significantly weaker if you don’t adjust the weapons’ damage
to compensate. The method for determining Strike damage on
page 64 abstracts over the sources of damage so you don’t have
to worry about adjusting the weapon’s damage. If you do decide
to calculate the weapon’s damage, give your creature weapon
specialization or greater weapon specialization much earlier
than a PC would get it. You might also need to add sneak attack
or similar abilities to make the creature deal more damage.
On the flip side, you might want to use a one-off creature as
a source of a particularly high-level piece of treasure, such as
a magic weapon. In these cases, you might want to make the
attack bonus higher for the potency rune or the damage higher
for a potent striking rune so the PCs feel the weapon’s effect
before they obtain it. This will make the treasure feel more
powerful, since they’ve already been on the receiving end.

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

When choosing spells, lean hard into the creature’s
theme. While many PCs choose spells to cover a wide
variety of situations, creatures are more evocative the more
focused they are. Consider selecting about three-quarters
of the spells based on relevance to the theme and the
remainder for other things. However, make sure the spells
aren’t one note—selecting fireball for most of a creature’s
spell slots doesn’t make for a compelling fire creature in the
way a diverse selection of fire spells would.
When choosing spells, some spells won’t be very
useful if cast at an extremely low level compared to the
creature’s levels. Most notably, damaging spells drop off
in usefulness for a creature that’s expected to last only a
single fight. A damaging spell 2 levels below the highest
level a creature of that level can cast is still potentially
useful, but beyond that, don’t bother. Spells that have the
incapacitation trait should be in the highest level slot if
you want the creature to potentially get their full effect
against PCs.

4121819

SPELL DC AND SPELL ATTACK ROLL
Set the creature’s spell DC and spell attack roll using
Table 2–11 on page 66. Most creatures use the same DC
for all their spells, even if they have multiple types, such
as a creature with both prepared spells and innate spells.
Use the high numbers for primary casters, and
the moderate numbers for creatures that have some
supplemental spells but are focused more on combat.
At 15th level and higher, the extreme numbers become
standard for spellcasters. A few creatures might use the
extreme numbers at lower levels, but they tend to be
highly specialized, with very weak defenses and Strikes.
Secondary spellcasters can go up to high numbers if
they’re above 15th level and have offensive spells. There
is no low value—the creature shouldn’t have any spells
in the first place if it would be that bad at using them!

65

18833873

4121820

4121820


Gamemastery Guide

TABLE 2–11: SPELL DC AND SPELL ATTACK BONUS
Level
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

18833874

18833874

Extreme
DC
19
19
20
22
23
25
26
27
29
30
32
33
34
36
37
39
40
41
43
44
46
47
48
50
51
52

Extreme Spell
Attack Bonus
+11
+11
+12
+14
+15
+17
+18
+19
+21
+22
+24
+25
+26
+28
+29
+31
+32
+33
+35
+36
+38
+39
+40
+42
+43
+44

High
DC
16
16
17
18
20
21
22
24
25
26
28
29
30
32
33
34
36
37
38
40
41
42
44
45
46
48

High Spell
Attack Bonus
+8
+8
+9
+10
+12
+13
+14
+16
+17
+18
+20
+21
+22
+24
+25
+26
+28
+29
+30
+32
+33
+34
+36
+37
+38
+40

Moderate
DC
13
13
14
15
17
18
19
21
22
23
25
26
27
29
30
31
33
34
35
37
38
39
41
42
43
45

Moderate Spell
Attack Bonus
+5
+5
+6
+7
+9
+10
+11
+13
+14
+15
+17
+18
+19
+21
+22
+23
+25
+26
+27
+29
+30
+31
+33
+34
+35
+37

PREPARED AND SPONTANEOUS SPELLS

INNATE SPELLS

Spell slots work best for creatures that are meant to play
like PC spellcasters. Choose the magical tradition best
suited to the creature. You aren’t strictly limited to that
tradition’s spell list, though sticking close to it will make
your creature’s connection to that tradition more clear. The
decision to use prepared or spontaneous spellcasting should
align with the creature’s theme: a spontaneous spellcaster
fits well as a one-off creature, since spontaneous spellcasting
grants greater flexibility in the middle of battle, while a
prepared spellcaster makes for a great recurring character
who can change their spells between appearances.
For a creature that can cast as many spells as a PC
spellcaster, the highest spell level the creature can cast is half
its level rounded up. It gets five cantrips. If the creature’s
level is odd, it gets two spell slots of the highest spell level
(plus three spell slots of each lower level), or three spell slots
of that level (plus four spell slots of each lower level). If its
level is even, it gets three spell slots of the highest spell level
(plus three spell slots of each lower level), or four spell slots
of that level (plus four spell slots of each lower level).
Because creatures tend to be “on stage” for only a short
time, you usually don’t need to fill every spell slot. You can
often fill just the top three levels of spells, pick cantrips, and
slot in a few thematic backup spells in the fourth level down.
For a recurring foe, you might give it a full complement.

Unlike prepared and spontaneous spells, innate spells can
be of higher level than half the creature’s level rounded
up, and you can choose how often they’re used—they
can even be used at will or be constant effects. The most
notable innate spells tend to be top-level ones that make
a big impact but can be used only once, at-will spells
that strongly reinforce the creature’s theme, and constant
spells that give it an ongoing benefit. A spell that’s usable
a limited number of times and falls at a lower level than
the top tier is typically less likely to come up in combat;
however, that’s a great spot for utility and recovery spells,
such as dispel magic or restoration.
Sometimes a strongly thematic innate spell is of a higher
level than the creature would normally be able to cast, but
it’s so fitting that it belongs there. Be careful when doing
this, as PCs might not have access to the appropriate
countermeasures for the spell. This option works best for
support, action denial, or battlefield control spells that
change the odds of a fight without outright killing anyone,
such as the succubus’s dominate spell. These should make
the fight more interesting, not end it. Keep the number of
such spells very low, typically just one.
Though you can achieve all sorts of things with innate
spells, always start with the theme and an idea of how
you want the creature spending its actions. And though

4121820

66

18833874

4121821

4121821


Tools

you could give the creature a tool to counter every kind of
PC attack or trick, remember that the players chose those
options to enjoy using them, rather than to be constantly
foiled by an effectively invincible creature.

RITUALS
Since rituals happen during downtime, giving them to
a creature is usually a purely thematic choice. You can
skip even looking at rituals in most cases. If you decide a
creature needs to have a ritual for your story, add in the
ritual whenever you need it.

DESIGN ABILITIES

In this step, you’ll take the ideas for abilities you noted when
you developed your concept and design these abilities for
your creature. You can look at existing creature abilities
from the Bestiary and feats from the Core Rulebook and
use them as is or modify them to fit your needs.
When choosing abilities, think about both the number
of abilities and the diversity of abilities. Having a large
number of similar abilities can make the creature tougher to
run, and it probably can’t use them all anyway. Diversity of
abilities gives the creature different ways to act in different
situations, and helps guide you as the GM. For instance, a
combat creature might have one ability it uses to get into
position, another to use when it wants to focus damage on
a single enemy, and a third that’s more defensive.

FOCUS SPELLS
Some creatures have focus spells, especially when those focus
spells clearly fit a creature’s theme. Simply give the creature the
focus spells you like and between 1 and 3 Focus Points (you
can also allow your creature to cast focus spells using spell
slots). Use the same DC and spell attack roll as any other spell.
A creature that has just 1 Focus Point is likely to cast a focus
spell only once, unless it’s a recurring enemy. If the creature has
plenty of spells already, you might want to skip focus spells
altogether, as they aren’t as strong as top-level spell slots.

Level Appropriateness
The effects of an ability should be appropriate to the
creature’s level. For damaging abilities, that means they
follow the damage guidelines on page 68. For others, take a
look at spells and feats with a similar effect to see if they’re
level appropriate. For instance, say you’re considering
giving a 6th-level creature the ability to teleport a short
distance. Dimension door is comparable—that’s a 4th-level
spell, normally cast by a 7th-level or higher creature. That
means 6th level probably isn’t too low, but the creature
shouldn’t be able to use the ability more than once. You
can also compare your creature to those in a Bestiary
volume to see if the special abilities seem similar in power
to those of other creatures of the same level.

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18833875

18833875

4121821

BASICS OF ABILITY DESIGN
There are a few principles of ability construction that you’ll
want to keep in mind. Some guidance for specific types of
abilities will come later, but these apply to everything.
• Respect the action economy.
• Make sure abilities are level appropriate.
• Avoid “invisible” abilities.

Action Economy
Understanding a creature’s action economy is
key for making it work in play. Remember how
short the lifespan of a typical combat creature
is. Including a bunch of combat abilities might
mean you spend time building actions the
creature will never have time to use. Narrow
your selections down to the smallest and most
compelling set that makes sense. Also keep in
mind that special actions will compete for time
with any combat spells you gave the creature.
Reactions can help, giving the creature a way to act
when it’s not its turn. See Reactive Abilities on page 69 for
advice on designing these tricky abilities.
Because of PC capabilities at higher levels, creatures
at those levels should get more abilities that improve
their action economy. For instance, creatures that grapple
should have Improved Grab instead of Grab, Speeds
should be higher, and many abilities that would have cost
an action at a lower level should be free actions.

67

18833875

4121822

4121822


Gamemastery Guide

Invisible Abilities
Avoid abilities that do nothing but change the creature’s
math, also known as “invisible abilities.” These alter a
creature’s statistics in a way that’s invisible to the players,
which makes the creature less engaging because the players
don’t see it using its abilities in a tangible or evocative
way. For example, an ability that allows a creature to use
an action to increase its accuracy for the round with no
outward sign (or worse, just grants a passive bonus to its
accuracy) isn’t that compelling, whereas one that increases
its damage by lighting its arrows on fire is noticeable.
These both work toward the same goal—dealing more
damage this round—but one is far more memorable.

ACTIVE ABILITIES
Abilities a creature uses on its turn have the most flexibility
and scope. You can use Table 2–11 to determine active
ability DCs as well as spell DCs. You can have an ability use
1 to 3 actions as needed (or be a free action in rare cases) and
use just about any type of tactic. Feats, spells, and existing
creature abilities provide a wide variety of examples, so look
for something similar to your idea to use as a basis.
Consider how you want your creature to spend its turns.
Two-action activities pretty much define the creature’s turn,
and single actions work best for supplemental benefits
or normal Strikes. And as you build out your idea of a
creature’s turn, don’t forget about movement! A creature
often needs to spend actions getting into position, especially
early in a fight. This is especially challenging with meleeonly creatures. You can give such creatures abilities similar
to Sudden Charge or the deadly mantis’s Leaping Grab.
Use 3-action abilities sparingly, as a creature can’t use
them if it is slowed or stunned—making a creature’s coolest
or most defining ability use up 3 actions might mean
the creature never gets to use it. These activities should
be reserved for abilities that include some movement
(like Trample) or that the creature is likely to use before
engaging in combat. Don’t make an ability use 3 actions as
a way to balance it—saying “This can be more powerful
than other abilities because it is less likely to work,” is a
recipe for frustration if you’ve made a cool ability that’s
too hard or even impossible for the creature to use.
Be especially careful with activities when designing
boss creatures. They’re likely to get targeted with the PCs’
most powerful detrimental effects, get grabbed, become
slowed, or otherwise have their actions restricted. Bosses
need to have solid options they can use with 1 or 2 actions.
This lets them use their remaining actions to get away, use
a simple ability, or otherwise keep the fight dynamic.

18833876

18833876

Free Actions
Use free actions that don’t have triggers sparingly, and
when you do, they should almost always be used for
support or utility actions, not Strikes or movement. If you
come up with a free action, consider whether it should
be its own action or part of a combo, such as drawing a

weapon and attacking. In cases like the latter, you might be
better off making a single action that allows the creature to
draw a weapon and then Strike.

Damage-Dealing Abilities
If a special action is a single action with only one target,
you can often set damage using Table 2–10: Strike Damage
on page 65. If it uses more than 1 action or requires setup
in some way, it might deal higher damage than is typical;
often, you can just use the extreme column in these cases.
For abilities that deal damage in an area, use Table 2–12
below. These numbers are based on a 2-action activity
(e.g., most damaging spells). Single actions should deal
much less damage. An ability that has another significant
effect, like applying a condition, should deal less damage;
for this, look at the damage for 2 or more levels lower,
and judge which value would best match based on the
severity of the additional effect. These abilities typically
allow a basic saving throw. The table includes values for
unlimited‑use abilities (ones that can be used at-will) and
limited-use ones (which can be used once or, like a Breath
Weapon, once or twice but not on consecutive turns).
You can use the dice given or generate your own
expression based on the damage in parentheses, as detailed
in the Strike Damage section on page 64. If a high-level
effect has a small area compared to similar abilities, you
have it deal more damage.

4121822

TABLE 2–12: AREA DAMAGE
Level
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

Unlimited Use
1d4 (2)
1d6 (4)
2d4 (5)
2d6 (7)
2d8 (9)
3d6 (11)
2d10 (12)
4d6 (14)
4d6 (15)
5d6 (17)
5d6 (18)
6d6 (20)
6d6 (21)
5d8 (23)
7d6 (24)
4d12 (26)
6d8 (27)
8d6 (28)
8d6 (29)
9d6 (30)
7d8 (32)
6d10 (33)
10d6 (35)
8d8 (36)
11d6 (38)
11d6 (39)

Limited Use
1d6 (4)
1d10 (6)
2d6 (7)
3d6 (11)
4d6 (14)
5d6 (18)
6d6 (21)
7d6 (25)
8d6 (28)
9d6 (32)
10d6 (35)
11d6 (39)
12d6 (42)
13d6 (46)
14d6 (49)
15d6 (53)
16d6 (56)
17d6 (60)
18d6 (63)
19d6 (67)
20d6 (70)
21d6 (74)
22d6 (77)
23d6 (81)
24d6 (84)
25d6 (88)

68

18833876

4121823

4121823

18833877

18833877


Tools

DEFENSIVE ABILITIES
Active offensive abilities usually fit creatures better than
defensive abilities do. Save defense increases for creatures
that are strongly defense-themed. For martial creatures,
something as simple as a shield and Shield Block is usually
plenty. Defensive abilities often run the risk of being
invisible abilities. For examples of good defensive abilities,
look at spells like sanctuary for ideas, or other spells that
create interesting protective effects instead of just granting
a bonus. If you do want to make a creature defensive, pick
one defensive ability rather than several, since stacking up
multiple defenses can make for a frustrating fight. One solid
style of defensive ability is a mode switch, which causes the
creature to get stronger defenses, but limits its attacks, spells,
or other offensive options.

REACTIVE ABILITIES
Reactions and free actions with triggers can give a creature
an impact outside its turn. This can make the fight more
interesting, but may also be risky. It’s tempting to give every
creature a reaction, but that’s not necessarily a good idea.
To decide whether your creature should have a reaction,
first consider if the creature has the reflexes or insight to
react well in the first place—for instance, an ogre doesn’t
have Attack of Opportunity because it’s a big oaf. Oozes,
constructs, and unintelligent creatures are less likely to have
reactions than others for this reason.
Second, look at the complexity of the encounter your
creature is likely to appear in. If you’ll have a large number
of creatures, skipping reactions can make the fight flow
faster. A creature that’s more likely to fight solo, on the other
hand, might have a reaction to give it a way to continue to
be dangerous amid an onslaught of attacks by the party.
When creating reactions, be careful with “gotcha”
abilities—ones that punish players for making perfectly
reasonable choices, for rolling poorly, and so on. If you
include abilities like this, they need to reinforce the
creature’s core theme and the play style you want it to use
in combat. For example, a creature that Strikes as a reaction
when someone fails an attack roll will encourage PCs to use
their actions on other tactics, rather than attacking multiple
times each turn. Is that what you want? Is this dynamic
essential for making the creature feel like it’s supposed to?
This isn’t the type of ability you’d give to any old creature—
only an incredible duelist or something similar.
Reactions should require something out of the ordinary
to happen, or should be relatively weak if triggered by
something ordinary. A reaction that triggers anytime
someone tries to Strike a creature is likely to be perceived
by the players as uninteresting because it’s so predictable.
The best reactions should be telegraphed so when they
happen, it makes sense to the players. Think of one of the
core reactions of the game: Shield Block. The creature raises
its shield—an obvious action the PCs can see—so when it
blocks damage from an attack, that makes perfect sense.
Similarly, if you made a crystalline creature, you might

have it build up sonic energy in a low thrum, so when it
uses a reaction to release a burst of sonic energy when hit,
the players can say, “Oh, I should have seen that coming.”

Reaction Damage
Reactions should use lower damage, usually that of a
moderate Strike. A reaction that deals area damage might
deal low damage, though use such reactions with caution.

CONSTANT AND AUTOMATIC ABILITIES
Certain abilities shouldn’t use any actions. Auras are a
common constant ability, with frightful presence, an adult
red dragon’s dragon heat, and a xulgath’s stench as notable
examples. An aura needs a range, and if it needs a DC,
you’ll usually set it to the moderate spell DC unless the aura
is one of the creature’s defining concepts. For example, the
xulgath’s stench DC is significantly higher because the aura
is such an iconic part of the creature.
Abilities the creature has no control over should be
automatic. For example, the living wildfire fire elemental
explodes into flame when it dies. It has no option not to,
so this wouldn’t make sense as a reaction or free action.
Conversely, the Ferocity ability is a reaction because it
requires the creature to give itself a last push to stay at 1 HP.

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

Constant and Automatic Damage
Much like for reactions, damage for a constant ability
should be pretty low. Usually this value is just below low
Strike damage. Automatic abilities like the living wildfire’s
explosion ability tend to deal moderate Strike damage or
unlimited-use area damage, and can deal even more if they
happen only after the creature is dead or otherwise no
longer presents a threat.

4121823

SKILL ABILITIES
A skilled creature might have abilities related to its skills.
The skill feats in the Core Rulebook make for a good
baseline. Avoid giving your creature skill abilities that
won’t matter in its interactions with PCs.

REVIEW HOLISTICALLY

Now it’s time to look over your completed creature as a
whole and make sure it’s living up to your concept. Can
it do everything you wanted? Does it fit its intended role?
Is there anything you could add or anything superfluous
you could cut to get the creature where it needs to be?
If this creature is built for combat, run through a few
turns in your head. Does it still work decently if it gets
slowed? Can it move into combat against the PCs effectively
given their mobility options compared to its own? Does it
have any abilities it’ll never use given its other actions?
When you’re satisfied with your creation, it’s ready to
hit the table. But that’s not necessarily the end! If you
notice issues during the game, you can fix them on the
spot. It’s your game, and you can freely change what you
wrote if you think differently later on.

69

18833877

4121824

4121824


Gamemastery Guide

TRAIT ABILITIES

Creatures with certain traits tend to have similar abilities
to one another. Many of them appear here, to help you
make your creatures match the theme of the trait when
you build your own creatures.

COLD
Immunities or Resistances cold

ABERRATION
Senses usually darkvision
Languages usually Aklo

AEON
Traits LN, monitor
Languages Utopian and other planar languages; envisioning
for true aeons
Weaknesses chaotic
Damage Attacks always deal additional lawful damage.

CONSTRUCT
Traits Many constructs lack minds and have the mindless trait.
Immunities bleed, death effects, diseased, doomed, drained,
fatigued, healing, necromancy, nonlethal attacks, paralyzed,
poison, sickened, unconscious; if mindless, add mental

DAEMON

Languages usually Auran
Speed Many air creatures have fly Speeds.

Traits NE, fiend
Languages Daemonic, telepathy 100 feet
Immunities death effects
Death Ability Daemons each represent a specific kind of
death, like death by disease or starvation, and have a
special ability based on the method of death they represent.

ANGEL

DEMON

Traits good (usually NG), celestial
Aura Angels each have a unique aura based on how they serve
as messengers and how they deliver those messages.
Speed usually has a fly Speed
Rituals usually angelic messenger

Traits LG, celestial
Virtue Ability Archons each represent a specific virtue, like
courage or hope, and have a special ability based on the
virtue they represent.

Traits CE, fiend
Languages Abyssal, telepathy (usually 100 feet)
Weaknesses cold iron, good
HP typically high to account for their multiple weaknesses
Sin Vulnerability Demons each represent a specific sin, like
envy or wrath, and have a special vulnerability based on
the sin they represent. This should be something the PCs
can exploit through their actions, which should then deal
mental damage to the demon. The amount of damage
should be based on how easy the vulnerability is to exploit.
Divine Innate Spells usually 5th-level dimension door and atwill 4th-level dimension door
Rituals usually Abyssal pact
Sin Ability Demons also have a special ability based on the
sin they represent, which either makes them better embody
the sin or instills that sin in others.

ASTRAL

DEVIL

Senses darkvision

Int –3 or higher

Traits LE, fiend
Languages Infernal, telepathy (usually 100 feet)
Immunities fire; Resistances physical (except silver), poison
Divine Innate Spells usually one 5th-level dimension door and
at-will 4th-level dimension door
Rituals usually Infernal pact
Infernal Hierarchy Ability Devils each have an ability
corresponding to the role they play in the infernal hierarchy,
typically focused around control or being controlled, from
the lowly lemure’s Subservience to the gelugon’s Tactician
of Cocytus and the pit fiend’s Devil Shaping.

CELESTIAL

DRAGON

Traits good
Senses darkvision
Languages Celestial

Senses darkvision
Languages usually Draconic
Speed usually has a fly Speed

AIR

18833878

18833878

Saves often a +1 status bonus to all saves vs. magic
Weaknesses evil
Damage Attacks always deal additional good damage.

ANIMAL
Traits N
Languages none
Int –4 or –5

ARCHON

AZATA
Traits CG, celestial
Weaknesses cold iron, evil
Freedom Ability Azatas each represent a specific freedom, like
free expression or free love, and have a special ability based
on the freedom they represent.

BEAST

4121824

70

18833878

4121825

4121825

18833879

18833879


Tools

Breath Weapon Many dragons have the Breath Weapon ability,
with specifics determined by the theme of the dragon.

EARTH
Perception often tremorsense
Languages usually Terran
Speed usually a burrow Speed

AC usually well below the low value for their level
HP usually around double
Immunities critical hits, precision, unconscious, often acid; if
it has no vision, add visual effects; if mindless, add mental

PLANT

ELEMENTAL

Traits plants without minds have the mindless trait
Senses usually low-light vision
Immunities if mindless, mental; Weaknesses sometimes fire

Senses darkvision
Immunities bleed, paralyzed, poison, sleep

PROTEAN

ETHEREAL
Senses darkvision

FEY
Senses low-light vision
Languages usually Aklo, Sylvan, or both
Weaknesses cold iron

FIEND

Traits CN, monitor
Languages Protean
Weaknesses lawful; Resistances precision, protean anatomy
Protean Anatomy (Bestiary 237)
Damage Attacks always deal additional chaotic damage.
Divine Innate Spells constant freedom of movement
Change Shape

Traits N, monitor
Senses lifesense (typically 60 feet)
Languages Requian
Immunities death effects, disease
Resistances negative, poison
Damage spirit touch (Bestiary 270)

FIRE

RAKSHASA

Languages usually Ignan
Immunities fire; Resistances cold

Traits LE, fiend
Saves usually +2 status bonus to all saves vs. magic (+3 vs.
divine magic)
Resistances physical (except piercing)
Change Shape

Traits fungi without minds have the mindless trait
Immunities if mindless, mental; Weaknesses sometimes
slashing or fire

introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

PSYCHOPOMP

Traits evil
Senses darkvision
Saves often a +1 status bonus to all saves vs. magic
Weaknesses good
Damage Attacks always deal additional evil damage.

FUNGUS

2

4121825

SPIRIT
Traits incorporeal, often undead

GIANT
Traits Large or bigger, humanoid
Senses low-light vision
Languages usually Jotun

SWARM

Int –3 or higher

Traits size based on the entire mass, usually Large or bigger
HP typically low; Immunities precision, swarm mind;
Weaknesses area damage, splash damage; Resistances
physical, usually with one physical type having lower or
no resistance

INEVITABLE

UNDEAD

Traits LN, aeon, monitor
Immunities death effects, disease, emotion, poison, unconscious
Damage Attacks always deal additional lawful damage.

Traits neither good nor evil
Senses darkvision

Traits Almost all undead are evil. Ghostly undead have the
incorporeal trait. Undead without minds, such as most
zombies, have the mindless trait.
Senses darkvision
HP negative healing
Immunities death effects, disease, paralyze, poison, sleep (or
unconscious if it never rests at all); if mindless, add mental

OOZE

WATER

Traits Almost all oozes lack minds and have the mindless trait.
Senses typically motion sense (Bestiary 254) and no vision

Languages usually Aquan
Speed usually has a swim Speed

HUMANOID

MONITOR

71

18833879

4121826

4121826


Gamemastery Guide

DESIGNING NPCS

Creatures that are meant to cleave closely to character
classes or intended to represent people rather than
monsters are NPCs. They might face more scrutiny
around their mechanics than creatures, because a player
can more directly compare their rogue to an NPC who
acts like a rogue. That doesn’t mean you have to build
an NPC exactly like a PC, though.
You can build NPCs just like you would any other
creatures. If an NPC should work like they have a class,
use the class features and feats of a suitable class to pick
abilities, and look at both the class’s proficiencies and
ability modifiers to determine how strong the NPC’s
statistics should be. Class Road Maps on page 73 has
prebuilt road maps for the Core Rulebook classes to get
you started.
If the NPC isn’t meant to work like they have a class
(a baker, for example), instead look at the NPC Gallery
on pages 202–249. Compare your NPC to the existing
ones to determine the NPC’s level, and look for abilities
that are similar to what yours should have. You can
also create new abilities as needed to get the NPC’s
interactions with the PCs to express their theme and
role in the story. These NPCs can be level –1 or level
0. Their capabilities are below those of PCs, and they
should typically not use any class features or feats from
PC classes. Creatures of these levels tend to be extremely
simple, and usually you can just take one from the NPC
Gallery and reskin it.
It’s highly recommended that you select NPC skills
using proficiency ranks as you would a PC, though
you don’t need to be precise about the number of skill
increases you give the NPC. You can give them earlier
access to expert, master, or legendary proficiency if
they’re a skill-based NPC, and better proficiency in
narrow areas of expertise, like Engineering Lore for a
tinker NPC.

18833880

18833880

NON-COMBAT LEVEL
An NPC’s level should represent their combat prowess.
A common person might not be a combat threat, even if
they’re important or highly skilled, and they consequently
have a low level. However, that doesn’t mean they can’t
present a challenge in other types of encounters. This is
represented by a non-combat level, and tends to be specific
to their area of expertise. For example, the barrister on
page 232 of the NPC Gallery is a 4th-level creature in an
encounter related to legal matters.
This can go the other way as well, such as with a
powerful combat creature that’s not suited to social
settings. This is usually the case with creatures untrained
in mental skills. You can improvise this as you run the
game, or you can plan ahead if you have something
particular in mind.
Building an NPC’s non-combat level is pretty simple.
Choose the level you want the NPC to be for the type of

challenge you have in mind, and use the skill numbers
for that level—typically high or even extreme. Some
challenges, such as social challenges, require the creature
to have a high Perception and Will DC, so in those cases,
you should increase those values as well. These should
be set at the moderate or high values for the non-combat
level, usually, depending on how adept you want the NPC
to be.
The Experience Points gained for besting an NPC
depend on how the party overcame them, because XP
comes from overcoming a specific challenge. If the
PCs defeat the NPC in a non-combat setting of the
NPC’s specialty, the party gets XP based on the NPC’s
non‑combat level. If they just beat the NPC up, the XP
would be based on the NPC’s creature level. Quite often,
that means 0 XP and failure at the PCs’ objective; for
instance, during a baking contest, if the PCs murder the
other baker, not only would they be disqualified, but they
would likely be apprehended for their crime.

PC-STYLE BUILD
If you do choose to build an NPC fully using the PC
rules, your NPC should generally end up being an
appropriate challenge as a creature of their level. They
will likely have lower statistics in some areas than if
you had built them using the creature rules, but more
options due to their full complement of feats and class
features. This is best saved for important, recurring
NPCs, especially if they’re meant to engage in social or
exploration endeavors rather than just battles.
There are still some considerations and shortcuts that
can expedite the process while ensuring the NPC works
as you intend.
• The creature’s treasure should follow the Treasure
for New Characters rules on page 510 of the Core
Rulebook. You’ll need to account for this in your
campaign’s overall treasure. You might even want
to give the NPC a higher-level item appropriate as a
treasure allotment for the level.
• You can expedite ability score generation by
making the starting ability modifiers add up to
+9, with no more than one modifier at +4 (and
typically no more than one negative modifier). You
can skip adding a background if you do this, but
you might want to give the creature two skills,
which includes one Lore skill, to represent the skills
granted by a background.
• It’s not necessary to assign every skill feat, particularly
for a higher-level NPC. You can just pick the most
emblematic ones and gloss over the rest.
• For general feats, Incredible Initiative and
Toughness make good choices.
• Most of the guidelines about choosing spells still
apply, though you might want a few more utility
spells that deal with non-combat challenges,
particularly in low-level slots.

4121826

72

18833880

4121827

4121827

18833881

18833881


Tools

CLASS ROAD MAPS

CLASS ABILITIES

You can use these suggestions when creating your road map to
emulate a PC class, customizing as you see fit. You’ll still need to
look through the class to pick feats, weapons, and the like. Any
statistic that isn’t specifically listed can use moderate numbers.
Alchemist low Perception; high Crafting; high Int, moderate or
better Dex or Str; low to moderate HP; moderate attack with bombs;
infused alchemical items, Quick Bomber if a bomber alchemist, a few
other alchemist abilities; it’s usually easier to give the alchemist its
bomb items rather than use Quick Alchemy on the spot.
Barbarian high Athletics; high Str, high to moderate Con; high
AC; high Fortitude; high HP; moderate attack and extreme damage
(when raging); Rage and a few barbarian abilities
Bard moderate Occultism, high Performance, high Charisma‑based
skills; high Cha; low Fortitude, moderate to high Will; low to moderate
HP; low accuracy; high to extreme spell DC; spontaneous occult
spellcasting as a bard of their level; composition spells
Champion low Perception; moderate Religion; high Str or Dex,
moderate Cha; extreme AC; low Reflex; moderate attack and high
damage; champion’s reaction, devotion spells, Shield Block
Cleric (Cloistered Cleric) high Perception; high Religion, moderate
or high skill themed to deity; low AC; high Wis; low Fortitude, high
Will; low to moderate HP; low accuracy; high to extreme spell DC;
prepared divine spellcasting as a cleric of their level; divine font;
domain spells
Cleric (Warpriest) moderate Perception; moderate Religion,
moderate or high skill themed to deity; high Str, moderate Wis; high
AC; low Reflex, high Will; high spell DC; prepared divine spellcasting
as a cleric of their level; divine font, Shield Block
Druid high Perception; high Nature, moderate or high skill from
order; high Wis; high Will; low to moderate HP; low accuracy; high
to extreme spell DC; prepared primal spellcasting as a druid of their
level; order ability and order spell for their order; Shield Block; add
an animal to the encounter for animal order
Fighter high Acrobatics or Athletics; high Str or Dex; high AC;
low Will; high attack and high damage; Attack of Opportunity,
Shield Block, a few fighter abilities
Monk high Acrobatics, Athletics, or both; high Str or Dex, moderate
Wis; high or extreme AC; moderate attack and high damage; Flurry of
Blows, a few monk abilities (possibly including ki spells)
Ranger high Perception; moderate Nature and moderate to
high Survival; high Str or Dex; high AC; moderate attack and high
damage (or for a simpler ranger, remove Hunt Prey and just use
high attack and high damage); a few ranger abilities
Rogue high Perception; high Dex (or key ability score for a
specific rogue’s racket); high Stealth and Thievery, plus more skills
than usual; high AC; low Fortitude, high Reflex; low to moderate HP;
moderate attack and low to moderate damage before sneak attack
plus high or extreme damage with sneak attack; sneak attack, a
few rogue abilities
Sorcerer low Perception; moderate bloodline skills and high
Charisma-based bloodline skills; high Cha; low AC; low Fortitude;
low HP; low accuracy; high to extreme spell DC; spontaneous
spellcasting of a tradition based on bloodline as a sorcerer of their
level; bloodline spells
Wizard low Perception; high Arcana; high Int; low AC; low
Fortitude; low HP; low accuracy; high to extreme spell DC; prepared
arcane spellcasting as a wizard of their level; Drain Bonded Item,
school spells and additional slots for a specialist (or additional uses
of Drain Bonded Item for a universalist)

You don’t need to give an NPC all the abilities from its class—
especially those that just alter numbers. The following abilities are
good quick choices that make for more interesting encounters.
Alchemist Feats 1st: Quick Bomber; 6th: Debilitating Bomb; 8th:
Sticky Bomb; 10th: Expanded Splash, Greater Debilitating Bomb;
14th: True Debilitating Bomb; 18th: Miracle Worker
Barbarian instinct ability and related feats, raging resistance;
Feats 1st: Raging Intimidation; 2nd: No Escape, Shake it Off; 4th:
Fast Movement, Swipe; 6th: Attack of Opportunity, Cleave; 8th:
Sudden Leap; 10th: Come and Get Me, Knockback, Terrifying Howl;
14th: Awesome Blow, Whirlwind Strike; 18th: Vicious Evisceration
Bard muse feats; Feats 4th: Melodious Spell; 6th: Dirge of
Doom, Steady Spellcasting; 10th: Quickened Casting; 14th: Allegro,
Soothing Ballad; 16th: Effortless Concentration; 20th: Fatal Aria
Champion divine ally and related feats, divine smite, exalt, feats
based on cause; Feats 1st: Deity’s Domain; 2nd: Divine Grace; 4th:
Aura of Courage, Mercy; 6th: Attack of Opportunity; 8th: Greater
Mercy; 12th: Aura of Faith; 14th: Aura of Righteousness, Divine
Reflexes; 18th: Celestial Form, Ultimate Mercy
Cleric Feats 1st: Harming Hands, Healing Hands; 2nd: Sap Life,
Turn Undead; 4th: Command Undead, Necrotic Infusion; 6th: Divine
Weapon, Selective Energy; 8th: Channeled Succor; 12th: Defensive
Recovery; 14th: Fast Channel; 16th: Eternal Bane, Eternal Blessing
Druid order feats; Feats 6th: Steady Spellcasting; 8th: Fey Caller
(only the added spells); 10th: Overwhelming Energy; 12th: Primal
Summons; 16th: Effortless Concentration, 20th: Leyline Conduit
Fighter bravery, feats associated with a combat style; Feats 1st:
Power Attack, Sudden Charge; 2nd: Intimidating Strike, Lunge;
4th: Knockdown, Swipe; 6th: Shatter Defenses; 8th: Blind-Fight,
Felling Strike, Sudden Leap; 10th: Certain Strike, Combat Reflexes,
Disruptive Stance, Fearsome Brute; 12th: Spring Attack; 14th:
Determination, Whirlwind Strike; 20th: Weapon Supremacy
Monk metal strikes, mystic strikes, perfected form, stance and
related feats; Feats 1st: Ki Rush, Ki Strike; 2nd: Crushing Grab,
Stunning Fist; 4th: Deflect Arrow, Flying Kick; 6th: Abundant
Step, Ki Blast, Whirling Throw; 8th: Wall Run; 10th: Winding Flow;
16th: Quivering Palm, Shattering Strike; 18th: Diamond Fists,
Swift River; 20th: Enduring Quickness, Impossible Techniques
Ranger Hunt Prey, hunter’s edge, nature’s edge, masterful hunter,
swift prey, companion or combat style and related feats; Feats 2nd:
Quick Draw, Wild Empathy; 4th: Scout’s Warning; 6th: Skirmish
Strike; 8th: Blind-Fight, Warden’s Boon; 10th: Camouflage; 14th:
Sense the Unsee; 18th: Shadow Hunter; 20th: Ultimate Skirmisher
Rogue surprise attack, deny advantage, debilitating strike,
master strike, rogue’s racket and related feats; Feats 1st: Nimble
Dodge; 2nd: Mobility, Quick Draw; 4th: Scout’s Warning; 6th: Gang
Up, Skirmish Strike, Twist the Knife; 8th: Blind-Fight, Opportune
Backstab; 10th: Sneak Savant; 12th: Fantastic Leap, Spring from the
Shadows; 14th: Sense the Unseen; 16th: Dispelling Slice, Perfect
Distraction; 20th: Hidden Paragon, Reactive Distraction
Sorcerer bloodline and related feats; Feats 1st: Counterspell,
Dangerous Sorcery; 4th: Bespell Weapon; 6th: Steady Spellcasting;
10th: Overwhelming Energy, Quickened Casting; 16th: Effortless
Concentration; 20th: Metamagic Mastery
Wizard school and related feats; Feats 1st: Counterspell; 4th:
Bespell Weapon; 6th: Steady Spellcasting; 10th: Overwhelming
Energy, Quickened Casting; 12th: Clever Counterspell; 14th: Reflect
Spell; 16th: Effortless Concentration; 18th: Infinite Possibilities;
20th: Metamagic Mastery, Spell Combination


2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121827

73

18833881

4121828

4121828


Gamemastery Guide

BUILDING HAZARDS

Building hazards designed for your game allows you to customize them to match your
story, location, and needs, as well as to surprise the other players at every turn. There’s no
wrong way to create a hazard, but this guide presents the information in the order you
might see it in a hazard stat block.

CONCEPT

The first thing you’ll need is a concept for your hazard.
What level is your hazard? Will it be simple or complex? Is
it a trap, a haunt, an environmental hazard, or something
else? If it’s a trap, is it mechanical, magical, or both? This is a
good time to brainstorm the hazard’s name and description,
as this will help you decide how the hazard can be disabled.
The following information builds on concepts from
Building Creatures, which starts on page 56.

HAZARD TYPES
The three main types of hazards are traps, environmental
hazards, and haunts.
Traps are usually built or placed, though they can also
form accidentally, such as if a magic
portal, through millennia of disuse,

18833882

18833882

malfunctions as its magic warps. Mechanical traps always
have some physical component, whereas purely magical traps
typically don’t. Magical traps can usually be counteracted
by dispel magic, and those without a listed proficiency rank
for Stealth can be found using detect magic. Thievery is the
most common skill used to disable traps.
Environmental hazards are either living things, like
dangerous spores and molds, or simply features of the
terrain or environment, like avalanches or rockslides. While
they are always physical, some environmental hazards can’t
reasonably be attacked or damaged, such as a cloud of
poisonous gas or a patch of quicksand. Survival is the most
common skill used to disable environmental hazards.
Haunts are spiritual hazards, usually formed when the
spiritual essence of a location is imprinted with the instincts
and emotions from a living being’s demise. Because haunts
lack matter, they rarely involve a physical component, and
when they do, that component is generally incorporeal or
might even be damaged only by positive energy. The skills
and options used to disable haunts vary, though using
Religion for an exorcism is common. However, even with
a successful check to disable a haunt, it can reoccur until
its unfinished business is resolved. Typically, successfully
disabling or enduring a haunt provides clues to determine
what it would take to lay it to rest permanently.

4121828

UNDERSTANDING AND
CHOOSING STATISTICS

Much like for creatures, hazard statistics can be extreme,
high, or low (hazards don’t need as much granularity, so
they usually don’t have moderate or terrible values for their
statistics). While they are defined in creature creation, when
building a hazard, you’ll use the values slightly differently.
Extreme: While extreme values remain
world-class statistics that are extremely difficult
to meet or exceed, unlike with monsters, almost
all hazards have one extreme statistic because
hazards normally activate only if they have
gone unnoticed or if someone critically
failed to disable them. Does it
have an extreme Stealth DC that
makes it incredibly hard to find,
an extreme Disable DC that makes
it perilous to disable, or an extreme
save DC that makes it deadly in
the event it triggers? These are the most
common choices, as each affects a different
phase of encountering the hazard.

74

18833882

4121829

4121829

18833883

18833883


Tools

High: This is a capable level, and can generally serve as a
baseline value; this value for hazards covers what would be
the high and moderate ranges for creatures.
Low: If a hazard has a weakness, like a poor Reflex save
for a bulky mechanical trap or an easy DC to disable for
a hard-to-find trap, it usually has a low value. If you need
something even lower, use a terrible value from Building
Creatures (pages 56–73), or just an incredibly low value
like the Armageddon orb’s Stealth (Core Rulebook 526).

STEALTH AND DISABLE

When determining a hazard’s combat statistics, first decide
how the hazard can be located and how hard it is to disable.
A hazard where the main challenge is how difficult it is to
find, like the Core Rulebook’s hidden pit, might have a very
different effect for its level than a hazard out in plain sight,
daring a PC to try to disable it, like the Armageddon orb.

TABLE 2–13: STEALTH AND DISABLE DCS
Level
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

Extreme
18
19
20
21
23
25
26
28
30
31
33
35
36
38
40
41
43
45
46
48
50
51
53
55
56
58

High
15
16
17
18
20
22
23
25
27
28
30
32
33
35
37
38
40
42
43
45
47
48
50
52
53
55

Low
12 to 11
13 to 12
14 to 13
15 to 14
17 to 15
18 to 17
20 to 18
21 to 19
23 to 21
24 to 22
26 to 23
27 to 25
29 to 26
30 to 27
32 to 29
33 to 30
35 to 31
36 to 33
38 to 34
39 to 35
41 to 37
42 to 38
44 to 39
45 to 41
46 to 42
48 to 43

When deciding how your hazard is disabled, come
up with a narrative description of how it would happen,
which will inform which methods and skills disable the
hazard. You’ll need to decide the proficiency rank necessary
to find the hazard as well as disable it with each method.
Remember, a hazard without a listed rank next to its Stealth
DC is obvious enough that creatures can find it without
Searching, and magical hazards without a listed rank are not
normally protected against detect magic. Most hazards built

by intelligent creatures are concealed have at least a trained
rank. Table 2–14 indicates the high and moderate proficiency
requirements by level; you can use lower proficiency ranks
than the ones listed, and if you use the high rank, consider
a secondary, perhaps less-efficient method to disable the
hazard using a lower rank. For instance, the bloodthirsty
urge haunt in the Core Rulebook can be disabled with
master Religion, or by a higher DC with expert Diplomacy.
If you need a Stealth modifier for a complex hazard,
just subtract 10 from the listed DC.

TABLE 2–14: MINIMUM PROFICIENCY
Levels
0 or lower
1–4
5–8
9–18
19 or higher

High
Untrained
Trained (expert for Perception)
Expert
Master
Legendary

Moderate
Untrained
Trained
Trained
Expert
Master

DEFENSES

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

If there’s a physical component that a character could break,
you’ll need to determine the hazard’s AC, Fortitude save,
and Reflex save, using the extreme, high, and low values
(preceded by E, H, or L on the table) as well as its Hardness,
HP, and Broken Threshold (BT). When building a purely
magical or formless hazard, you can skip this section.

TABLE 2–15: DEFENSES

4121829

Level EAC HAC LAC E Save H Save L Save Hardness HP*
–1 18 15 12 +9
+8
+2
2–4
11–13
0 19 16 13 +10
+9
+3
3–5
15–17
1
19 16 13 +11
+10
+4
5–7 23–25
2 21 18 15 +12
+11
+5
7–9 30–34
3 22 19 16 +14
+12
+6
10–12 42–46
4 24 21 18 +15
+14
+8
11–13 46–50
5 25 22 19 +17
+15
+9
12–14 50–54
6 27 24 21 +18
+17
+11
13–15 54–58
7 28 25 22 +20 +18 +12
14–16 58–62
8 30 27 24 +21 +19 +13
15–17 62–66
9
31 28 25 +23 +21 +15
16–18 66–70
10 33 30 27 +24 +22 +16
17–19 70–74
11 34 31 28 +26 +24 +18
19–21 78–82
12 36 33 30 +27 +25 +19 20–22 82–86
13 37 34 31 +29 +26 +20 21–23 86–90
14 39 36 33 +30 +28 +22 22–24 90–94
15 40 37 34 +32 +29 +23 23–25 94–98
16 42 39 36 +33 +30 +25 25–27 101–107
17 43 40 37 +35 +32 +26 27–29 109–115
18 45 42 39 +36 +33 +27
29–31 117–123
19 46 43 40 +38 +35 +29 31–33 125–131
20 48 45 42 +39 +36 +30 33–35 133–139
21 49 46 43 +41 +38 +32 36–38 144–152
22 51 48 45 +43 +39 +33 39–41 156–164
23 52 49 46 +44 +40 +34 44–46 168–176
24 54 51 48 +46 +42 +36 46–50 180–188
* The Broken Threshold is usually half the hazard’s HP.

75

18833883

4121830

4121830


Gamemastery Guide

Some hazards, even high-level ones, don’t make sense
with a high Hardness value. In those cases, you can skip the
Hardness and use the HP values from table 2–7: Hit Points
on page 63. Especially for complex hazards, you might
want to divide the durability over multiple sections, located
in different positions, to encourage teamwork and mobility.

OFFENSE

Almost all hazards need an attack bonus or a save DC,
and hazards that deal damage need to list a damage
value. Simple hazards deal about twice as much damage
as complex hazards and have an attack bonus even higher
than the extreme attack bonus for a creature (abbreviated
as S. Atk in Table 2–16: Offense). Complex hazards
usually have attack bonuses akin to a high attack bonus
for a creature (abbreviated as C. Atk in Table 2–16). You
can adjust them further using Table 2–9: Attack Bonus
on page 64 if your hazard needs it. Simple hazard DCs
aren’t as high for their level as their attack bonuses are,
since effects with DCs usually have some effect even on a
successful saving throw; use the EDC and HDC columns
for extreme and hard DCs on Table 2–16: Offense below.
The damage columns on the table give a damage
expression you can use, followed by the average damage
in parentheses. If you want to make your own damage
expression, remember that average damage is 2.5 for a d4,
3.5 for a d6, 4.5 for a d8, 5.5 for a d10, and 6.5 for a d12.
18833884

18833884

TABLE 2–16: OFFENSE
Level S. Atk C. Atk Simple Dmg Complex Dmg EDC HDC
–1 +10 +8
2d4+1 (6)
1d4+1 (3)
19 16
0
+11 +8
2d6+3 (10)
1d6+2 (5)
19 16
1
+13 +9
2d6+5 (12)
1d6+3 (6)
20 17
2
+14 +11 2d10+7 (18)
1d10+4 (9)
22 18
3
+16 +12 2d10+13 (24) 1d10+6 (12) 23 20
4
+17 +14 4d8+10 (28) 2d8+5 (14)
25 21
5
+19 +15 4d8+14 (32) 2d8+7 (16)
26 22
6 +20 +17 4d8+18 (36) 2d8+9 (18)
27 24
7
+22 +18 4d10+18 (40) 2d10+9 (20) 29 25
8
+23 +20 4d10+22 (44) 2d10+11 (22) 30 26
9
+25 +21 4d10+26 (48) 2d10+13 (24) 32 28
10 +26 +23 4d12+26 (52) 2d12+13 (26) 33 29
11 +28 +24 4d12+30 (56) 2d12+15 (28) 34 30
12 +29 +26 6d10+27 (60) 3d10+14 (30) 36 32
13 +31 +27 6d10+31 (64) 3d10+16 (32) 37 33
14 +32 +29 6d10+35 (68) 3d10+18 (34) 39 34
15 +34 +30 6d12+33 (72) 3d12+17 (36) 40 36
16 +35 +32 6d12+35 (74) 3d12+18 (37) 41 37
17 +37 +33 6d12+37 (76) 3d12+19 (38) 43 38
18 +38 +35 6d12+41 (80) 3d12+20 (40) 44 40
19 +40 +36 8d10+40 (84) 4d10+20 (42) 46 41
20 +41 +38 8d10+44 (88) 4d10+22 (44) 47 42
21 +43 +39 8d10+48 (92) 4d10+24 (46) 48 44
22 +44 +41 8d10+52 (96) 4d10+26 (48) 50 45
23 +46 +42 8d12+48 (100) 4d12+24 (50) 51 46
24 +47 +44 8d12+52 (104) 4d12+26 (52) 52 48

DESIGNING SIMPLE HAZARDS
When designing a simple hazard, make sure to select an
appropriate trigger and effect. Often, a simple hazard that
merely damages its target is little more than a speed bump
that slows down the game without much added value, so
think about the purpose of your hazard carefully, both
in the story and in the game world, especially when it’s
a hazard that a creature intentionally built or placed
in that location. A great simple hazard does something
interesting, has a longer-lasting consequence, or integrates
with the nearby inhabitants or even the encounters in
some way (you can find more information on integrating
hazards with encounters in Dynamic Encounters on
page 48).

DESIGNING COMPLEX HAZARDS
Unlike a simple hazard, a complex hazard can play the
part of a creature in a battle, or can be an encounter all
its own. Many of the concerns with damaging effects when
designing a simple hazard don’t apply when designing a
complex hazard. A complex hazard can apply its damage
over and over again, eventually killing its hapless victim,
and isn’t intended to be a quick-to-overcome obstacle.
Complex hazards have a lot more in common with
creatures than simple hazards do, and you’ll see that a
complex hazard’s statistics are similar to those of a creature.
A good complex hazard often requires disabling multiple
components or otherwise interacting with the encounter
in some way. For instance, while the Core Rulebook’s
poisoned dart gallery requires only one Thievery check to
disable, the control panel is on the far end of the gallery, so
a PC would need to make their way across first.

4121830

Building Routines
A complex hazard has a routine each round, whether it
stems from preprogrammed instructions built into a trap,
instincts and residual emotions swirling around a complex
haunt, or a force of nature like sinking in quicksand. Make
sure to build a routine that makes sense for the hazard; an
environmental lava chute that ejects lava into the area each
round shouldn’t be able to seek out and precisely target
only the PCs, but it might spatter random areas within
range or everything within range, depending on how you
describe the hazard. However, a complex haunt might be
able to recognize life force and target living creatures.
If you create a hazard that can’t consistently attack the
PCs (like the Core Rulebook’s blade pillar, which moves
in a random direction), you can make it deadlier than
normal in other ways.
The hazard should have as many actions as you feel
it needs to perform its routine. If you split the routine
out into several actions, you can also remove some of
the hazard’s actions once partial progress is made in
disabling or destroying it; this can give the PCs a feeling
of progress, and it can encourage them to handle the
hazard if it appears in a encounter alongside creatures.

76

18833884

4121831

4121831

18833885

18833885


Tools

SIMPLE HAZARDS

A simple hazard uses its reaction when triggered.

SHRIEKER

HAZARD –1

ENVIRONMENTAL FUNGUS

Stealth DC 12
Description This human-sized purple mushroom emits a
piercing shriek when disturbed.
Disable DC 18 Survival to carefully approach and cut the
mushroom’s air sac without triggering the shrieker
AC 12; Fort +8, Ref +2
HP 9; Immunities critical hits, object immunities, precision damage
Shriek [reaction] Trigger A creature or light source approaches within
10 feet of the shrieker or the shrieker takes damage; Effect
The shrieker emits a deafening screech that deals 1d6 sonic
damage to creatures within 30 feet (DC 16 basic Fortitude
save; creatures that critically fail this saving throw are
deafened for 1 minute).
Reset 1 minute

SNOWFALL

HAZARD 0

ENVIRONMENTAL

Stealth DC 16 (trained)
Description Loose snow and ice have built up on a high surface,
such as a tree branch or a rooftop. Its grip on the surface is
tenuous, and it is likely to fall if the surface moves.
Disable DC 19 Survival (trained) to safely dislodge the snow,
or deal any amount of fire damage to destroy the hazard
without triggering it
AC 16; Fort +10, Ref +8
HP 8; Immunities critical hits, object immunities, precision damage
Snowdrop [reaction] Trigger A creature moves beneath where the
snowfall is resting; Effect Ice and snow fall on the triggering
creature, dealing 2d6+3 bludgeoning damage (DC 18 basic
Reflex save) and soaking their clothing. Until they change
into fresh clothing or spend at least an hour in an area of
normal or higher temperature, they treat cold environments
as one step colder (for example, mild cold as severe cold).

HAMPERING WEB

the web (DC 20). On a critical failure, the webbing also clings
to the creature’s face, making them sickened 1, and they can’t
attempt to reduce this condition until they Escape the web.

BROWN MOLD

HAZARD 2

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics

ENVIRONMENTAL FUNGUS

Stealth DC 21 (trained)
Description This unassuming fungus leeches heat out of the air.
Disable DC 18 Survival (trained) to safely remove the mold
Emit Cold (aura, cold); 5 feet. Brown mold deals 2d6 cold
damage to nearby creatures.
AC 18; Fort +11 Ref +5
HP 30 (BT 15); Immunities critical hits, fire, object immunities,
precision damage; Weaknesses cold 10
Leech Warmth [reaction] Trigger Fire comes within 5 feet of the brown
mold; Effect The brown mold expands into every square
adjacent to its space. As it grows, it pulls more heat from
its surroundings, dealing 2d6+6 cold damage (DC 18 basic
Fortitude save) to creatures within 10 feet after it expands.
Reset After expanding, the brown mold can’t grow again for 1 day.

TREACHEROUS SCREE

Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

HAZARD 3

ENVIRONMENTAL

Stealth DC 23 (trained)
Description The footing on this sloped ground appears to be
stable at first glance, but the tiny rocks that cover it are
loosely packed and prone to slipping.
Disable DC 20 Survival (trained) to navigate a safe path
Rockslide [reaction] Trigger A creature steps on the
unstable ground; Effect Rocks tumble and slip
beneath its feet. The triggering creature
must attempt a DC 21 Reflex save as
they tumble against the rocks, which
deal 2d10+13 bludgeoning damage.

4121831

HAZARD 1

ENVIRONMENTAL

Stealth DC 18 (expert)
Description Semitransparent sheets of
webbing span the entryway, ready to
capture small insects or hamper larger
creatures that pass through.
Disable DC 17 Survival (trained) to dislodge it
AC 19; Fort +10, Ref +11
HP 26 (BT 13); Immunities critical hits, object
immunities, precision damage
Ensnare [reaction] Trigger A creature that isn’t a
spider walks into the web; Effect The web
wraps around the triggering creature’s body,
clinging to their limbs. The triggering creature
must succeed at a DC 20 Reflex save or take a –10-foot
circumstance penalty to all their Speeds until they Escape

77

18833885

4121832

4121832


Gamemastery Guide

Critical Success The creature takes no damage.
Success The creature takes half damage and falls prone
in its space.
Failure The creature takes full damage, falls prone in its
space, and tumbles down to the bottom of the slope.
Critical Failure As failure, but double damage.

TITANIC FLYTRAP

Stealth DC 25 (trained)
Description On the surface, a titanic flytrap appears to be
a patch of the more common flytrap plant, but beneath
murky waters it hides a far larger set of jaws, reaching 10
feet across and reinforced with woody branches and lined
with paralytic hairs.
Disable DC 22 Survival (trained) to mislead the flytrap’s sense
of weight and pressure
AC 21; Fort +15, Ref +8
HP 56 (BT 28); Immunities mental; Resistances acid 20, fire 10
Snap Shut [reaction] Trigger A Small or Medium creature moves into
a square that is within reach of the flytrap’s hidden jaws;
Effect The flytrap’s jaws snap shut, making a jaws Strike
against the triggering creature.
Melee [one-action] jaws +17, Effect devour
Devour The target is trapped by the flytrap’s jaws, gaining the
grabbed condition until it Escapes (DC 21). Additionally, it
is exposed to the titanic flytrap toxin from the hundreds of
tiny hairs that line the inside of its leaves. If the flytrap’s
jaws Strike was a critical success, the target takes a –2
circumstance penalty to its saving throws against this
poison. At the end of each of target’s turns that it remains
grabbed, the target takes 3d6 acid damage.
Titanic Flytrap Toxin (contact, poison) Saving Throw DC 21
Fortitude; Maximum Duration 4 rounds; Stage 1 2d6 poison
damage and stunned 1 (1 round); Stage 2 3d6 poison damage
and stunned 2 (1 round); Stage 3 4d6 poison damage and
paralyzed (1 round)
Reset 1 hour (or longer, after a large meal)

18833886

18833886

HAZARD 4

ENVIRONMENTAL

SPECTRAL REFLECTION

HAZARD 5

HAUNT

Stealth DC 26 (expert)
Description The reflection in the mirror subtly twists and distorts,
its expression taking on an unnerving sneer of malice.
Disable DC 23 Religion (trained) to exorcise the spirit, or DC 23
Thievery (trained) to quickly cover the mirror
AC 19; Fort +15, Ref +10
Hardness 13, HP 50 (BT 25); Immunities critical hits, object
immunities, precision damage
Spectral Impale [reaction] Trigger A living creature approaches
within 15 feet of the mirror, and the mirror is lit with dim
or brighter light; Effect Shadowy barbs impale the body
of the reflected creature as the haunt makes a shadow
barbs Strike.
Melee [one-action] shadow barbs +19, Damage 4d8+9 negative plus
sap vitality

Sap Vitality A creature hit by the reflection’s shadow barbs
must attempt a DC 22 Fortitude save as the haunt tries
to draw a portion of its vital essence into the mirror. The
target is drained 1 on a failed saving throw, or drained 2 on
a critical failure.
Reset The haunt re-forms after 1 minute, manifesting in any
mirror within its infused area (see Special below).
Special Spectral reflections often infuse entire buildings,
manifesting in any sufficiently large mirror. The example
Hit Points and Hardness given represent a typical mirror
reinforced by the haunt; at your discretion, the haunt might
appear in reflective surfaces that are harder to destroy.
Defeating a manifestation through damage destroys the
surface, preventing the haunt from using it again. If this
haunt appears in an area with many mirrors, consider giving
PCs double or even triple the XP for a typical simple hazard.

GHOSTLY CHOIR

HAZARD 6

HAUNT

Stealth DC 20 (expert)
Description A choir of lost souls rises out of the floor, singing
an eerie chant that terrifies its listeners and buffets their
bodies with walls of sound.
Disable DC 28 Performance (trained) to disrupt the song’s
resonance with another tune or DC 28 Religion (trained) to
ritually silence the spirits
Profane Chant [reaction] (auditory, emotion, enchantment, fear,
mental, occult) Trigger A creature moves within 10 feet of
the section of floor from which the choir can arise; Effect
The choir rises, and its song deals 4d8+18 mental damage to
non-evil creatures within 30 feet of the souls’ spectral forms.
Affected creatures must each attempt a DC 24 Will save.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature takes half damage and becomes
frightened 1.
Failure The creature takes full damage and becomes
frightened 2.
Critical Failure The creature takes double damage. It also
becomes frightened 3 and fleeing for 1 round.

GREEN SLIME

4121832

HAZARD 9

ENVIRONMENTAL

Stealth DC 30 (expert)
Description A caustic green film clings to the ceiling above,
watching for prey to pass beneath it.
Disable DC 33 Survival (expert) to carefully peel the slime off
the ceiling without touching it
AC 20; Fort +25 Ref +15
HP 200 (BT 100); Immunities critical hits, object immunities,
precision damage; Weaknesses cold 20, fire 20
Dissolving Ambush [reaction] Trigger A creature walks beneath the
slime; Effect The green slime drops on top of the creature,
attempting to dissolve it into a nutritious slurry. The target
must attempt a DC 28 Reflex save.
Critical Success The target leaps out of the way, and it
is unaffected.

78

18833886

4121833

4121833

18833887

18833887


Tools

Success A small amount of the slime splashes onto the
target. The target is drained 1.
Failure The slime lands on its target. The target is drained 1,
and this condition value increases by 1 at the end of its
turn each round until the slime is removed. If the target
reaches drained 4, the next time its drained value would
increase, it dies and collapses into a slurry of nutrients.
A slime covering a target can no longer be removed
through Survival checks, and damage dealt to the slime is
also dealt to the target (applying the target’s immunities,
weaknesses, and resistances rather than those of the
green slime).
Critical Failure The slime completely coats its target. This
has the same effect as a failure, except the target is
immediately drained 2, becomes drained 4 after 1 round,
and dies after 2 rounds.
Reset 1 hour, as the slime feasts and then slowly creeps back
up to the ceiling

JEALOUS ABJURER

HAZARD 11

HAUNT

Stealth DC 33 (master)
Description A robe-clad spirit rises out of the floor, pointing an
accusing finger.
Disable DC 36 Arcana, Nature, Occultism, or Religion (master)
to convince the spirit that the target’s magical knowledge is
too great to be trifled with
Rend Magic [reaction] (abjuration, arcane) Trigger A creature that
is currently affected by a beneficial spell approaches
within 30 feet of the abjurer; Effect Envying the fame and
magical prowess of others, the jealous abjurer attempts
to engineer a catastrophic failure in the highest-level
beneficial spell currently affecting its target. It
attempts a counteract check with a +26 modifier.
If the counteract check succeeds, the spell is
dispelled, and the creature it had been affecting
takes 4d12+30 force damage as the spell violently
implodes (DC 32 basic Reflex save).
Reset 1 hour

PLUMMETING DOOM

target’s Fortitude DC. If the haunt succeeds, the target is
thrown over the edge of the cliff, where it then falls 120
feet to the ground.
Until the haunt is defeated, each creature within 60 feet
of the cliff’s edge must attempt a DC 40 Will save each time
they would spend an action or reaction to Arrest a Fall, Fly,
Grab an Edge, or otherwise avoid falling; if they fail the save,
the action is disrupted. The haunt automatically attempts
to counteract spells that would slow a fall or mitigate the
effects of falling, such as feather fall, with a counteract
modifier of +32.
Reset 1 hour

GRASP OF THE DAMNED

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules

HAZARD 17

HAUNT

Stealth DC 43 (master)
Description These desperate spirits are the echoes of people
who committed great atrocities in the name of an evil god.
Now, they are left with only the knowledge that their souls
have been damned, and the unwavering belief that they can
better their fate by providing powerful sacrifices for their
fiendish masters.
Disable DC 46 Religion (master) to inspire a deity to intervene
and counteract the ritual
Mark for Damnation [reaction] (death, divine, necromancy) Trigger
Three or more sentient living creatures of 13th level or higher
enter the haunt’s area; Effect The haunt deals 6d12+35
negative damage to each creature in the haunt’s area, and
each creature must attempt a DC 40 Will save.

NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121833

HAZARD 15

HAUNT

Stealth DC 40 (master) to hear the echoes of a
faraway object crashing into the ground
Description Four vengeful spirits grab interlopers
and toss them off the edge of a nearby
120-foot‑tall cliff.
Disable DC 40 Athletics (trained) to push back
so forcefully that the spirits fear being thrown
off the cliff, or DC 40 Religion (expert) to
temporarily seal the spirits away
Call of the Ground [reaction] (divine, abjuration) Trigger
A creature approaches within 15 feet of the edge
of the cliff; Effect Each spirit attempts to throw a
creature within 60 feet of the cliff’s edge off the cliff
by attempting a check with a +26 modifier against the

79

18833887

4121834

4121834


Gamemastery Guide

Critical Success The creature takes no damage and is
doomed 1.
Success The creature takes half damage and is doomed 1.
Failure The creature takes full damage, becomes doomed 2,
and is marked for damnation.
Critical Failure The creature takes double damage, becomes
doomed 3, and is marked for damnation.
If a creature that is marked for damnation dies within the
next 24 hours, including from the haunt’s damage, its soul
is immediately dragged away to the plane of the evil deity
that the damned spirits served, where the creature’s soul
is held captive by one of that deity’s powerful servitors.
Only wish and similarly potent effects are able to recover
the lost soul directly; however, it is also possible to recover
the soul by journeying to the evil plane and defeating the
soul’s captor.
Reset 1 day

COMPLEX HAZARDS

Complex hazards roll initiative and act on their turn.

ETERNAL FLAME

Stealth +18 (expert)
Description A raging spectral inferno arises out of thin air,
strengthening all undead creatures within its area. This
haunt most often arises from the charred remains of a
group of three people who burned to death, whether in
a terrible accident or a deliberate execution, and their
unavenged souls burn with rage.
Disable DC 27 Diplomacy (expert) to temporarily calm the rage
of one of the three spirits, or DC 30 Religion (trained) to
exorcise one of the spirits; three total successes are required
to disable the haunt
Searing Agony [reaction] (divination, mental) Trigger A living creature
approaches within 10 feet of the remains of a victim of the
original fire; Effect Memories of the pain suffered by the
fire’s past victims assault the triggering creature’s mind. The
creature must attempt a DC 25 Will save, and the haunt
then rolls initiative.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature is sickened 1.
Failure The creature is sickened 2.
Critical Failure The creature is sickened 3, and it is
flat‑footed for as long as it remains within the haunt’s
area and for 3 rounds thereafter.
Routine (1 action) Phantom flames rage across the haunted
area, dealing 4d6 fire damage to each living creature
within the area (DC 23 basic Will save). Undead creatures
in the area are infused with flames for the following round.
They gain the fire trait and immunity to fire, and all their
attacks deal an additional 1d6 fire damage. Objects in the
area are unaffected.
Reset The flames cease 1 minute after all living creatures leave
the area, but after 1 hour, the anger and pain simmer up and
the haunt is ready to trigger again.

18833888

18833888

HAZARD 7

COMPLEX HAUNT

CONFOUNDING BETRAYAL

HAZARD 8

COMPLEX HAUNT

Stealth +21 (expert)
Description Allies appear to shed their disguises and reveal
themselves to be malevolent monsters.
Disable DC 28 Deception (expert) twice to confound the haunt
with your own deceptions, or DC 28 Occultism (trained)
twice to create a ward against the haunt’s mental influence
Unmask [reaction] (illusion, occult) Trigger Two or more creatures
enter the haunt’s area; Effect Each creature sees the forms
of nearby creatures shift and change, appearing to transform
into fiendish or aberrant beings with a thirst for blood. Each
creature in the area must attempt a DC 30 Will save.
Critical Success The creature sees through the illusions
entirely and is temporarily immune to the haunt’s routine
for 1 minute.
Success The creature is unaffected by the strange images.
Failure The creature believes the illusions to be true; if
they become confused by the haunt’s routine, they can’t
attempt flat checks to end the confused condition when
they take damage.
Critical Failure As failure, but the creature is left with a
lingering suspicion of others and can’t benefit from Aid
reactions for 24 hours.
Routine (1 action; illusion, incapacitation, occult) The haunt
continues to confound victims’ senses and inspire them to
commit violence against each other. Each creature in the
haunt’s area must attempt a DC 26 Will save.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected and temporarily
immune for 1 minute.
Success The creature is unaffected.
Failure The creature is confused for 1 round.
Critical Failure The creature is confused for 1 minute.
Reset The haunt deactivates 1 minute after all creatures leave
the area but resets immediately thereafter.

PERILOUS FLASH FLOOD

4121834

HAZARD 10

COMPLEX ENVIRONMENTAL

Stealth +22 (expert)
Description Whether made up of water rushing through the
streets that sweeps up dangerous debris along the way or
a less natural substance bursting free of its container, this
relentless flood batters everything in its path.
Disable three DC 35 Athletics, Crafting, or Survival checks
to move or construct barricades strong enough to create
a shelter from the flood. While this creates a safe place to
stand, creatures outside of the barricaded area may still be in
danger depending on the nature and the source of the flood.
Burst Free [reaction] Trigger A creature or effect breaks the flood’s
containment; Effect The hazard rolls initiative as the flood
surges forth.
Routine (1 action) The flood advances forward 60 feet, crashing
into all creatures within its area. Each creature must attempt
a DC 30 Fortitude save as the floodwaters pummel them and
pull them downstream. The amount and type of damage dealt
are based on the nature of the flood, and certain types of

80

18833888

4121835

4121835

18833889

18833889


Tools

floods impose additional effects. The turbulent waters mean
creatures within the area of the flood must attempt a DC 20
Athletics check to Swim in order to move, and those who do
not succeed at a check to Swim each round may drown.
Critical Success The creature takes no damage.
Success The creature takes half damage.
Failure The creature takes full damage and is moved 10 feet
along with the water.
Critical Failure The creature takes double damage and is
moved 20 feet along with the water.
• Acidic Runoff This caustic flood dissolves flesh as it
moves, dealing 1d12 bludgeoning damage and 1d12+8 acid
damage. Additionally, it deals 2d6 persistent acid damage to
creatures who critically fail their Fortitude saves.
• Battering Waves This flood of rushing water deals 2d12+10
bludgeoning damage.
• Repulsive Refuse This flood has picked up tainted or
disease-ridden objects like sewer runoff or rotting food.
It deals 2d12+8 bludgeoning damage. Each creature
exposed to the flood must attempt a DC 29 Fortitude
save, becoming sickened 1 on a failure or sickened 2 on
a critical failure. Additionally, creatures who come into
contact with the flood waters are exposed to filth fever
(DC 20 Fortitude, Bestiary 258).
• Sharp Debris The waters have picked up various objects,
some of which are particularly sharp. The flood deals 1d12
bludgeoning damage and 1d12+12 piercing damage.
• Sticky Goo The substance is particularly sticky. It deals
2d12+6 bludgeoning damage. Additionally, each creature
in the flood must attempt a DC 29 Reflex save at the
beginning of their turn each round. On a failed saving
throw, they take a –10-foot circumstance penalty to all
their Speeds for 1 round. On a critical failure, they are
instead immobilized for 1 round.

FLENSING BLADES

HAZARD 12

COMPLEX HAUNT

Stealth +25 (expert)
Description A whirling tornado of spectrally propelled glass and
steel slices whatever it touches to ribbons.
Disable DC 35 Thievery (master) to precisely adjust the blades
so that they destroy each other, or DC 38 Religion (expert) to
weaken the haunt; four successes are required to disable it
AC 33; Fort +27, Ref +25, Will +22
Hardness 20; HP 100 (BT 50); Immunities critical hits, object
immunities, precision damage; Weaknesses positive 15
Whirling Blades [reaction] Trigger Three or more creatures enter
the area of the haunt; Effect sharp fragments lift up from
the ground and begin to spin in rapid circles taking up one
5-foot square. The haunt rolls initiative.
Routine (3 actions) The tornado of blades uses 3 actions to
move, traveling up to 30 feet with each action and dealing
2d10+10 slashing damage. Each creature in its path must
attempt a DC 33 Reflex save.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature takes half damage.

Failure The creature takes full damage plus 1d10 persistent
bleed damage.
Critical Failure The creature takes double damage and 1d10
persistent bleed damage. It also becomes wounded 1 (or
increases its wounded value by 1, if it is already wounded).
Each successful check to disable this hazard reduces the
haunt’s movement by 30 feet, and the fourth success
disables it completely.
Reset The haunt draws jagged shards back into its area over the
course of an hour, after which it can trigger again.

DANCE OF DEATH

HAZARD 16

COMPLEX HAUNT

Stealth +32 (master)
Description An eerie orchestra compels all who hear it to dance
until they collapse from exhaustion.
Disable DC 42 Intimidation (expert) three times to frighten
dancers and spectral musicians alike away from participating
in the deadly performance, DC 40 Performance (master)
twice to produce a tune discordant enough to disrupt the
compulsion, or DC 42 Religion (master) three times to
banish the spirits with prayers
Prelude [reaction] (auditory, enchantment, incapacitation, occult)
Trigger A creature approaches within 30 feet of the
orchestra; Effect The orchestra compels all creatures that
can hear it to begin dancing. Each creature must attempt a
DC 41 Will save, with the following effects.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature is flat-footed and cannot use
reactions. Additionally, it must spend 1 of its actions each
round dancing. Dancing is a move action that allows the
creature to Stride up to half its Speed.
Failure As success, except the creature must spend 2 of its
actions each round dancing.
Critical Failure As failure, except the creature must spend 3
of its actions each round dancing.
Routine (1 action; auditory, enchantment, incapacitation,
occult) The orchestra performs a raucous tune, compelling
all creatures that can hear it to spend actions dancing.
Each round, creature must attempt a DC 37 Will save; the
results of this save modify the number of actions that the
creature must spend dancing each round. If this would
cause the creature to spend more actions dancing than it
can use on its turn, the creature takes 10d6 damage (or
double that on a critical failure) from moving faster than
its body can manage.
Critical Success The creature decreases the number of
actions it must spend dancing by 1.
Success No effect.
Failure The creature increases the actions it must spend
dancing by 1.
Critical Failure The creature increases the actions it must
spend dancing by 2.
Reset The eerie orchestra spends an hour retuning its
phantasmal instruments, after which it is ready to begin its
routine again.

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121835

81

18833889

4121836

4121836


Gamemastery Guide

BUILDING ITEMS

Creating your own magic and alchemical items is an amazing way to customize the
adventure and gameplay for your group and add unique elements without requiring quite
the same mechanical depth as a whole new class, archetype, or ancestry.
New items make great mementos of previous adventures
and tend to be one of the easiest elements for a character to
begin using mid-campaign after receiving them as a reward.
This section explains the philosophy and numbers behind
creating items so you can design your own in no time!

18833890

SPECIAL ABILITIES

First, take a look at similar items. For example, if you want
a permanent item that lets someone fly, look at the broom of
flying, which moves of its own volition to a location and thus
can’t be used to gain a huge advantage during combat, and
winged boots, which can. This will give you an idea of the
right level range and the different specifics and limitations of
existing items. You might even be able to just adjust one of
those a bit to get what you want with minimal work.

When deciding what special abilities are appropriate for
what level, it’s best to look for similar spells to gauge the
effect. For most consumables, the effect should be less
powerful than the highest level spell a spellcaster of the
item’s level could cast. Scrolls are about the most efficient
you can get—they’re the same level the spellcaster would
be—but they require a spellcaster that has the spell on their
list, and take the same actions as casting the spell normally.
The most straightforward choice is a once-per-day ability.
For this, the item’s level should be at least 2 levels higher
than the minimum level a spellcaster could first cast that
spell. For example, if your ability is about as powerful as
a 3rd-level spell cast once per day (perhaps haste), then it
should be at least a 7th-level item. A basic wand is a good
example. However, a wand is flexible and can contain the
most effective possible choice for its spell level (such as
long‑lasting spells where once a day is effectively permanent),
so a specific item that doesn’t grant such a spell could have
additional powers or bonuses at the same price as a wand.
If the item can be activated multiple times per day, it
should be at least 4 levels higher instead—9th level in our
example. Frequency could range from twice per day to
once per hour and anything in between. Choose whatever
makes sense to allow the characters to use the item more
frequently without being effectively constant or unlimited.
The appropriate frequency, or whether it’s ever okay to
have unlimited activations, varies wildly based on the spell.
Unlimited castings of a cantrip is fine, but an effect akin to
a non‑cantrip spell is rarely a good idea. Only attempt to
build such an item when you’re certain of the consequences.
Items that can be activated less often than once per day
don’t appear too often, and they usually fit best with abilities
that make sense outside of encounters. It’s still best to stick
to the guidelines for once-per-day abilities, but these items
tend to have more properties—and often strange ones.

ITEM EFFECTS

Constant Abilities

CONCEPT AND ROLE

First, come up with a concept for the item based on the role
the item serves in your game and in the game’s world. You
might include a new item in an ancient ruin to hint at the its
history and the people who used to live there. For instance, a
Thassilonian ruin might have an item based on rune magic,
while a Jistkan ruin might have an item related to golems.
A new magic item might be important later in the story,
or its role might be as simple as a fun wolf-themed item for
the monk that uses Wolf Stance. Keep your concept in mind
to guide you through the rest of the process. Start thinking
about what kind of magic item it will be. Each item type has
its own niche, and some are less likely to be as useful to the
PCs. For instance, new weapons and armor require the PC
to give up the weapon or armor they already have, which
might make them more reluctant to use the new items unless
they’re noticeably better, while consumable items don’t have
as big an impact on the story as permanent items.

18833890

For specific advice for the type of magic item you are
creating, check out Designing by Type on page 83.

ITEM LEVEL
A new item is typically going to be within a few levels of
the PCs. If it’s too low, it might not be interesting, and if it’s
too high, it might be too powerful or too lucrative to sell.

COMPARISON

Next, use the item’s concept and role to decide its effects.
This is where your creativity will bring the item to life. Make
sure to have it do something exciting and roleplay‑inspiring.
A magic item that does nothing more than deliver a bonus is
far less interesting, even if the item does have a load‑bearing
item bonus, like a magic weapon. To determine the item’s
power, take into account the special abilities you give the
item as well as the item bonus (if any) that it grants.

4121836

If you want an effect to be constant, set the level and Price
accordingly. For instance, let’s say your group is 16th level
and you want to give them an item themed around flying.
A 7th-level fly spell lasts an hour already, so one casting
covers a significant portion of the adventuring day. To keep
it simpler, you decide to create a 16th-level cloak that lets
the wearer constantly fly. Remember, some effects were
never meant to be constant and could warp your game.

82

18833890

4121837

4121837

18833891

18833891


Tools

Activation Actions
Watch out when picking the number of actions an
activation takes! A 1-action activation that casts a spell
with a 2-action casting time is drastically more powerful in
an encounter than an item with a 2-action activation would
be. An item like that is typically much higher level, and it
works best with “helper” spells or ones with limited utility
rather than offensive spells. The safest bet is to use the same
number of actions the spell normally takes to cast.

Scaling out of Usefulness
Some spells aren’t appealing if their level is too low. For
instance, an item that casts 1st-level burning hands three
times per day might be 5th or 6th level. The problem is that
spell scaling has the biggest impact at low levels, so the spell
isn’t effective compared to other actions a character could
take. Err on the side of fewer, more impressive activations.

BONUSES
If your item includes item bonuses, check the table below for
the minimum item levels the game’s math expects permanent
bonuses to be applied to. A lower-level item might give such
a bonus temporarily, but keep track to make sure the item
isn’t effectively permanent. If a character typically picks
three or fewer locks a day, there’s no difference between a
+2 item bonus to pick all locks and an activation that gives
a +2 item bonus to Pick a Lock three times per day.
For attack bonuses, AC, and saves, the minimums match
magic weapons and magic armor. You can have other items
with these bonuses (like handwraps of mighty blows), but
keep in mind they compete with fundamental runes.
Skill bonuses come on a wider range of items. Some are
more broadly useful, so an Athletics item might be more
expensive than an equivalent Society item. Gaining a bonus
to Perception is especially valuable compared to gaining a
bonus to a skill. Just because an item is the minimum level
for its bonus doesn’t mean the bonus should be the item’s
only power. The item can and should have an additional
interesting power beyond the bonus. Likewise, an item can
come at a higher level than the minimum, but if it’s much
higher, its abilities start to compete with the next bonus.

TABLE 2–17: LEVELS FOR PERMANENT ITEM BONUSES
Statistic
+1
+2
Attack bonus
2
10
AC
5
11
Save (resilient rune)
8
14
Skill/Perception
3
9
* This is also the minimum level for apex items.

+3
16
18
20
17*

DESIGNING BY TYPE

The following guidance applies to items of various types.

ALCHEMICAL ITEMS
Alchemical items are consumables. Because alchemists can
make a large number for free, alchemical items tend to be

on the weaker end for their level, with lower Prices. Avoid
alchemical effects that feel too much like magic. Alchemy is
capable of fantastical things, but should have its own distinct
feel; where you draw the line depends on your game.
Alchemical bombs are like weapons for alchemists and
should usually primarily deal damage, with small extra
effects. Existing bombs are great models. Elixirs are varied;
make sure not to duplicate potions, especially highly magical
ones. Be careful with mutagen drawbacks; it’s easy to make
one that doesn’t affect certain characters. Look at the serene
mutagen. If its drawback didn’t affect spells, Wisdom‑based
casters who didn’t use weapons would have no drawback.
Poisons are one of the trickier alchemical items to make,
and it’s usually best to just tweak one found in the Core
Rulebook to avoid making something that’s overpowered;
compare to poisons of the same type that have similar onset
and stage duration, as longer onset and duration poisons
tend to deal drastically more damage. Alchemical tools are
best used for adding a little weirdness. They can be especially
creative and interesting, but tend not to be powerful.

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

AMMUNITION
Magic ammunition is consumable; launching it destroys
it. Pay attention to whether you give the ammunition an
activation: any big flashy effect for its level should almost
always have one, since otherwise the effect is essentially a
free action on top of a Strike. This is particularly important
for extremely low-level ammunition, since a high-level
character could use that ammunition for every Strike
without noticing the gold cost. If the ammunition doesn’t
deal normal Strike damage on a hit, remember to say that!
Dealing damage is the default.

4121837

ARMOR AND WEAPONS
Specific armor and weapons replace the opportunity to add
property runes, so you have a lot of space to design. Choose
abilities that feel attached to the fact that they are weapons
or armor; for instance, a fiery sword that you point at an
enemy to shoot fire bolts is more on theme than a fiery
sword that casts wall of fire in an unconnected way.
The specific item should cost more than the base armor
or weapon would with just the fundamental runes,
but you can often discount the cost of the additional
components significantly as part of the specific item’s
special niche. Be careful about specific armor or weapons
that include property runes in addition to unique specific
abilities. If you discount the item, you might end up
with an item significantly superior to one built using the
normal property runes system. That’s not always bad,
since it’s still giving up customization for power, and this
can be appropriate if the item has an important place in
your story. Just make sure the difference isn’t too drastic.
If you just want to create armor or a weapon with runes
and no extra special abilities, you can do so. The Price
of such an item is the sum of all the runes’ Prices, and its
level is that of the highest‑level rune on the item.

83

18833891

4121838

4121838


Gamemastery Guide

POTIONS VS. ELIXIRS
Alchemical items and magic items follow a similar price
economy based on their level, but the effects of potions
can be a bit broader and more directly magical. Alchemists
can also make extremely large numbers of elixirs at an
item level equal to their alchemist level, so if a 17th level
elixir was competing with a 9th level spell for power, an
alchemist would be packing the equivalent of over 40 9th
level spells, and potentially quickened spells thanks to the
single action activation.

When picking abilities, you can also consider taking from
the relic gifts found on pages 96–105. Even if your game
doesn’t use relics, that section has plenty of choices sorted
by theme. If you do, keep in mind that relic abilities are
typically more powerful than usual for their level and that
those abilities wouldn’t scale on a normal magic item.

HELD ITEMS
Usually, held items should require manipulation to use, with
Interact activations. They are most often tools, implements,
items that can be thrown, and the like. Imagine a PC
physically using the item and what that looks like.
Remember that held items are more challenging for
martial characters to use, compared to spellcasters or
hands-free characters, like monks. A barbarian might have
to give up a two-handed weapon to use a held item, and so is
less likely to use one. This means you might want to design
held items specifically for non-martial characters, or have
them be items a martial character uses outside of combat.

18833892

18833892

OILS
Oils are consumables you slather onto items or, rarely,
creatures. They provide an interesting opportunity to apply
effects to other items. Just remember not to accidentally
make something that should be applied topically into
a potion; for instance, a petrified character can’t drink
an anti-petrifying potion! The actions an oil takes to use
depend on how thoroughly it needs to be applied. For one
used outside of combat, it could take a minute or more.

POTIONS
Potions are consumables in the truest sense; you literally
consume them. Since the action of drinking isn’t easy to
split up, they take only a single action to activate. This
advantage makes potions that replicate spell effects
incredibly powerful, and it’s the reason potions are nearly
always higher level than scrolls with similar effects.

RUNES
Property runes are a fun and versatile way to customize
weapons and armor without throwing away the previous
items. Each should be fairly simple, especially at lower levels,
because combining runes can make things overcomplicated.
Compare to other properties to determine the right level.

SCROLLS
You’ll never need to design a new scroll, but use them as
a comparison when designing other types of consumables.
If you’re designing a consumable that seems like it’s much
better than a scroll of its level—or faster to activate—you
should probably raise the item’s level or adjust the effect.

SHIELDS
Use the sturdy shields as benchmarks for the best possible
shield Hardness, HP, and BT for a shield of that level. Your
new shield should have less than those benchmarks since it
also does something else, and you can use the magnitude of
the reduction to build room for creative defensive abilities.

STAVES
You’ll need to come up with a theme and curate a list of
spells that stay close to that theme, typically one to three
per spell level, all on one spell list. A staff is always at least
3 levels higher than the minimum level for a spellcaster to
cast the highest-level spell it contains, so a staff with up to
4th-level spells would be at least a 10th-level item.

STRUCTURES
Structures are evocative and make great tertiary items,
quirky but not part of a combat build. This allows you to
price them affordably, but make sure there isn’t some hidden
abuse where the structure drastically alters encounters. The
structure trait is intended to help as a starting point.

4121838

TALISMANS
Because talismans are affixed ahead of time but don’t take
an action to retrieve, they reward forethought and planning.
Those that can be activated as a free action also have the
best action efficiency of any consumable. In the same way
scrolls reward specific spellcasters, talisman requirements
reward particular types of characters. Talismans might
grant a single use of a feat, with an additional effect if
the character already has that feat. Think of talismans
as martial characters’ answer to scrolls to expand on the
options of the non-spellcasters at your table.

WANDS
You won’t need to design basic magic wands, but you
might want a special wand. When designing a new special
wand, your wand’s level will usually be 1 to 2 levels higher
than the basic wand, depending on the magnitude of the
special effect. Remember that if you make the wand 2
levels higher, it’s now competing with wands of a spell a
whole level higher, so the special effect should be worth
that cost!

WORN ITEMS
Worn items vary wildly in their effects, but they all take up
one of a character’s 10 invested items. Remember to include
the item’s worn entry, if applicable (or — if you could
imagine someone wearing 10 or more with no difficulty).

84

18833892

4121839

4121839

18833893

18833893


Tools

Where the item is worn should usually match its effects or
bonuses: shoes help you move, eyepieces affect your vision,
and so on. As with held items, imagine a character wearing
the item to picture how they use its magic.
Apex items are always at least level 17 and should have
unique abilities on top of their bonus, just like other items.

FILL IN THE NUMBERS

You’re almost done! The final step is to fill in the numbers.

DCS
Choose any DCs for the item’s abilities. You can’t go wrong
with the typical DCs in Table 2–18. However, an item with
a narrow function might have a DC up to 2 higher, and one
that forces a save (such as with an aura) is typically 2 lower.
The lower the DC, the quicker the item becomes obsolete.

TABLE 2–18: MAGIC ITEM DCS
Item Level
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

DC
15
16
17
18
19
20
23
24
25
27
28
29
30
31
34
35
37
38
41
43

ITEM PRICES
Use the following guidelines for pricing items.

Permanent Items
Each item level has a price range. Based on the item’s role
and abilities, decide where in that range to place it. There’s
plenty of variation, and you primarily need to worry about
Price only if you expect the PCs will be able to sell it.
Primary items cost near the highest value for their level.
They have a big impact on combat or player ability. This
includes weapons, armor, and Perception items. The highest
price is for items like magic weapons, magic armor, and
apex items. So a +1 striking weapon is 100 gp at 4th level.
Secondary items, with middle values, give significant
secondary benefits or enhance highly consequential
noncombat or support skills like Medicine or Crafting.

Tertiary items, with low value, are weird or very
specific items, ones not usually core to a character’s build.
Especially strange ones might fall into the gap between
two levels.

TABLE 2–19: PERMANENT MAGIC ITEM PRICE
Level
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Price
10–20 gp
25–35 gp
45–60 gp
75–100 gp
125–160 gp
200–250 gp
300–360 gp
415–500 gp
575–700 gp
820–1,000 gp
1,160–1,400 gp
1,640–2,000 gp
2,400–3,000 gp
3,600–4,500 gp
5,300–6,500 gp
7,900–10,000 gp
12,000–15,000 gp
18,600–24,000 gp
30,400–40,000 gp
52,000–70,000 gp

Core Item
+1 weapon
+1 skill item
+1 striking weapon
+1 armor

+1 resilient armor
+2 skill item
+2 striking weapon
+2 resilient armor
+2 greater striking weapon

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

+2 greater resilient armor
+3 greater striking weapon
+3 skill item, apex item
+3 greater resilient armor
+3 superior striking weapon
+3 superior resilient armor

4121839

Consumables
Consumables have a slightly narrower range, with topend items like scrolls, optimum healing potions, or
super-useful consumables like a potion of invisibility at
the high end.

TABLE 2–20: CONSUMABLE PRICE
Level
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Price
3–4 gp
5–7 gp
8–12 gp
13–20 gp
21–30 gp
31–50 gp
51–70 gp
71–100 gp
101–150 gp
151–200 gp
201–300 gp
301–400 gp
401–600 gp
601–900 gp
901–1,300 gp
1,301–2,000 gp
2,001–3,000 gp
3,001–5,000 gp
5,001–8,000 gp
8,001–14,000 gp

85

18833893

4121840

4121840


Gamemastery Guide

ITEM QUIRKS

Item quirks are peculiar characteristics that make items unique in unusual ways. These
can make individual items—particularly permanent items—stand out from one another,
and can give additional wonder to magical items beyond just their mechanical benefits.
You can use the table found here to quickly apply a quirk
to any item, such as items found as treasure or new items
that a PC creates. Rather than rolling, you can instead
choose one yourself or invent a new quirk. Item quirks
don’t normally have any mechanical effect, since their
only purpose is to be colorful and further flesh out the
world, though you can add one if you so choose. Such

effects should never grant more than a +1 item bonus or
–1 item penalty, and even then the statistic or check it
applies to should be narrow. For a quirk that grants an
item the ability to speak, you choose the language based
on the history of the item, or your best guess of what that
history might be. It’s typically a language spoken by the
item’s creator.

TABLE 2–21: QUIRKS

27
28
29
30
31

Soprano
Shrinking
Aromatic
Temperate
Slime trail

32
33
34
35
36

Tetrachromatic
Resounding
Insect-attracting
Ancient tongue
Bloodthirsty

37
38

Polished
Scribing

39
40
41
42
43
44

Dirty
Eye-altering
Preserving
Leafy
Wet
Encouraging

45

Loyal

46

Ritualistic

47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56

Restless
Displaced
Caring
Projecting
Hair-altering
Watchful
Generous
Bass
Leaking
Taste-altering

57
58

Bouncy
Lucid

59
60
61

Decorous
Junky
Cavorting

d%
01
02

Quirk
Melodic
Skin-altering

03

Choral

04
05
06

Mood coloration
Chatty
Spoiling

07

Friendly

08
09
10
11
12

Muffling
Runic
Comfortable
Rain-blocking
Clumsy

13
14

Elemental
appearance
Magnetic

15

Aberrant

16

Dream-eating

17
18

Clean
Hungry

19
20

Smelly
Flamboyant

21

Verdant trail

22
23

Complaining
Detecting

18833894

18833894

24
25
26

Fibbing
Compressing
Attentive

Description
Faint music plays when in use.
The user’s skin color changes to a
bright color such as blue or green.
Repeats everything the user says
in a singing voice.
User’s mood affects the item’s color.
Happily engages in small talk.
Food within 1 foot spoils at twice
the normal rate.
Requests to be introduced to
everyone the user meets.
Nearby sounds are slightly quieter.
Runes appear on the user’s skin.
Can serve as a pillow or blanket.
The user remains dry in the rain.
When unattended, knocks over
other small items within 1 foot.
Seems made of flame, water, or
another elemental material.
Small, ferrous objects of light
Bulk or less adhere to it.
Has tentacles, teeth, or other
off‑putting features.
Creatures asleep within 10 feet do
not dream.
Remains pristine despite filth.
Needs daily meals, often odd
things like wood shavings.
Smells like the last food the user ate.
Flashes of light, sparks of color,
and other effects shower from it.
Small plants grow where the user
walks, remaining for 1 hour.
Grumbles when not in use.
Aware of a specific animal or
plant, such as squirrels or poison
ivy, within 30 feet.
Tells grandiose and obvious lies.
User is slightly shorter.
Turns to face the last creature to
touch it.

User’s voice becomes higher.
Decreases in size when used.
Nearby air smells pleasant.
Slight warmth spills from the item.
User leaves a trail of slime where
they walk, remaining for 1 hour.
Colors seem more vivid to the user.
Nearby sounds are slightly louder.
Harmless insects swarm around it.
Speaks in a forgotten language.
The sight of blood causes it to
quiver in anticipation.
Highly reflective.
Absorbs ink for 1 hour, allowing
its points to be used as a pen.
A layer of filth always remains.
User’s eye color changes.
Food within 1 foot spoils at half rate.
Small plants grow on or from it.
It and its user are always damp.
Offers encouragement when the
user fails a check.
Remains within 5 feet of the user,
as if on a tether.
Demands the user perform a
simple act every morning.
Slowly moves and fidgets.
Appears offset from where it is.
Provides advice and reminders.
Light creates a kaleidoscopic effect.
User’s hair color changes.
Staring eyes cover it.
Produces small, token gifts.
User’s voice becomes lower.
Secretes a harmless liquid.
Food tastes different, such as
tasting sweeter or saltier.
Bounces on collision.
Creatures asleep within 10 feet
see the item in their dreams.
Insists the user use polite language.
Appears shoddy or made of scraps.
Dances in place when not in use.

4121840

86

18833894

4121841

4121841


Tools
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84

Furry
Covered by a thin coat of fur.
Unusually colored An outlandish color, such as a
bright purple suit of armor.
Sonorous
Sounds a pure tone when struck.
Starry
Seems made of night sky.
Compact
Packs neatly into a smaller form.
Misting
Constantly leaking mist or steam.
Chirping
Coos and squeaks when used.
Balanced
Always remains perfectly upright.
Sun-blocking
User never receives sunburns.
Animal-attracting Harmless animals follow the user.
Flaunting
Forces user to move dramatically.
Tracing
Followed by thin trails of color.
Monologuing
Recites long lectures or speeches.
Foretelling
Makes mysterious predictions.
Adhesive
Sticks slightly to any surface.
Levitating
Floats slightly above a surface.
Slimy
Covered by a thin layer of slime.
Commentating
Remarks on its surroundings.
Numbing
User is less sensitive to pain.
Time-telling
Announces the current time.
Towering
User is slightly taller.
Absorbent
Absorbs up to one pint of liquid.
Faceted
Appears made of crystal or gems.

85
86
87
88
89

Bubbly
Image-flipping
Hair-growing
Alternating
Sweaty

90
91
92
93
94

Glittering
Molting
Echoing
Shadowless
Storytelling

95
96

Chilled
Color-washing

97
98
99

Growing
Floating
Two quirks

100

Three quirks

Creates bubbles when used.
User appears to be mirrored.
User’s hair grows at double rate.
Appearance slowly changes.
Becomes damp and pungent
when used extensively.
Shimmers and glows with light.
Sheds a thick film every morning.
Sounds around the user echo.
Item and user cast no shadow.
Is inscribed with a story or knows
a tale it can recite on command.
Slightly cool to the touch.
User’s vision shifts to a given
coloration, such as sepia or
monochrome.
Increases in size when used.
Slowly descends when dropped.
Roll twice on the table and apply
both quirks to the item. Reroll
any results of 99 or 100.
Roll three times on the table and
apply all quirks to the item. Reroll
any results of 99 or 100.

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18833895

18833895

4121841

87

18833895

4121842

4121842


Gamemastery Guide

INTELLIGENT ITEMS

Magic items with a mind of their own have been a hallmark of myth and fantasy for
millennia. When integrated into a campaign, they can become memorable characters in
their own right.
Intelligent items are a special kind of magic item that
straddles the line between treasure and NPC. An
intelligent item might be another type of item as well: it
could be an artifact (like Serithtial on page 112), a cursed
item (page 90), or even a relic (page 94) that grows with
its wielder.
Introducing an intelligent item is an effective
way to subtly alter the party dynamic. An
intelligent item works well when its personality
makes it a natural complement or foil for its
partner: the PC investing, holding, or otherwise
interacting with the item. An intelligent item
that can communicate only with that particular PC is
also a great way to engage players who are a bit quieter,
or those slower to speak in a scene where all the PCs can
talk to a particular NPC. Due to their inherently limited
agency, intelligent items are at less of a risk for stealing
the spotlight than other NPCs who travel along with
the party.

INTELLIGENT ITEM
RULES

18833896

18833896

Every intelligent item has the intelligent trait. Intelligent
items can’t be crafted by normal means—typically an
accident, a divine act, or a major sacrifice on the part
of the creator is required to grant the item the mental
essence it needs for sentience, and in some rare cases
the spiritual essence it needs to have a soul of its own.
Because of this, intelligent items are always rare or
unique. The normal statistics and rules for wearing
or using an item of its type still apply to an intelligent
item. In addition, intelligent items have a few statistics
other items lack.

ALIGNMENT
An intelligent item always has an alignment trait, just
like any other creature, even if it isn’t fully sapient. Few
intelligent items are capable of growing and changing
their alignment and fundamental nature; most are fixed
at the time of their creation.

PERCEPTION AND SENSES
An intelligent item that has any sense of the world
around them has a Perception modifier. Intelligent items
have only the senses listed within their entry, rather than
the assumed assortment of senses that most creatures
have. If an intelligent item notices something its partner
doesn’t, it might be able to communicate with its partner
and let them know.

COMMUNICATION AND LANGUAGES
Intelligent items almost always have some means of
communication—an easy way to demonstrate an item’s
intelligence! The most common ways are via empathy,
speech, and telepathy. Speech and telepathy function
as they do for any creature, while an empathic
connection allows the item to share only
emotions. Empathic and telepathic connections
are often limited either to the item’s partner or
to a certain distance.
If an intelligent item understands or speaks
any languages, they are listed in parentheses in
its Communication entry. If the item doesn’t have speech
listed, it can only understand the listed languages, not
speak them.

SKILLS
Intelligent items might have skill modifiers for
Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma-based skills that fit
their nature.

4121842

ABILITY SCORES
Intelligent items have Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma
scores, though as inanimate objects, they don’t have
Strength, Dexterity, or Constitution entries.

WILL SAVE
Since they have their own minds, intelligent items might
be subject to mental effects that require a Will save.

ITEM AGENCY

As a default, intelligent items have control over all their
own magic, meaning an intelligent magic weapon could
deny the effects of its fundamental and property runes
if it so chose, and intelligent items perform their own
activations when they wish. Intelligent items can typically
use 3 actions per turn, acting on their partner’s turn. These
actions don’t count toward their partner’s 3 actions. They
have a reaction if any of their activations requires one.
Beyond denying magic effects and communicating
their displeasure, intelligent items can usually influence or
hinder their partners only in subtle ways. If the item is a
weapon or tool necessary for an action (like thieves’ tools),
it can at least be disruptive enough to make its partner take
a –2 circumstance penalty to associated checks, much as if
the partner were using an improvised weapon or tool. If
an intelligent item can have a greater effect, such as seizing
control of its partner’s body for a time, the intelligent
item’s entry includes those abilities.

88

18833896

4121843

4121843

18833897

18833897


Tools

DESIGNING INTELLIGENT
ITEMS

When you first set out to create an intelligent item, ask
yourself what role you expect the item will play in your
game. Unlike any other item, the intelligent item is a
character of its own and adds to the group dynamic,
usually in ways similar to a minor NPC who follows the
party throughout the adventure. That means it’s important
to have a clear role in mind. Is the item an ally in the PCs’
dangerous quest? A kindred spirit and confidante? A foil
for the PC? A morally ambiguous ally worth handling for
its great power? Or perhaps a bit of comic relief? Once
you know what you want in the item, you can develop
its personality and abilities in parallel, coming up with
thematic links between them.
When choosing values for the intelligent item’s
statistics, you’ll often want to use values suitable for a
creature of its level. You could use much lower values
if you want to give it a weakness, but keep in mind that
a low Will modifier might make it particularly easy to
control, which could be a problem if it can make life
miserable for its partner. Because the item can usually
activate its abilities on its own, the intelligent item is
essentially adding a limited additional character to the
PCs’ team, so consider its effect on the encounters the
PCs face. For example, a high-level normal item that
lets a PC cast a 3rd-level fireball every round might be
reasonable given that it counts toward the PC’s available
actions, but an intelligent item is adding that fireball on
top of everything else the PCs can do.

SPECIFIC INTELLIGENT
ITEMS

The following, as well as the intelligent artifact Serithtial
on page 112, are a few example intelligent items to get
you started.

GENIUS DIADEM
RARE

N

APEX

ARCANE

ITEM 18
DIVINATION

INTELLIGENT

Usage worn circlet; Bulk L
Perception +22; precise vision 30 feet, imprecise hearing 30
feet, constant detect magic
Communication speech (Common, Draconic, and eight other
common languages)
Skills Arcana +34, seven Lore skills +28, Occultism +28,
Society +28
Int +8, Wis +0, Cha +4
Will +24
The genius diadem is a diadem of intellect that typically acts
like an arrogant professor or mentor, often boasting that it
is a certified greater intellect and far superior to your own
intelligence, even after the benefits the diadem grants you. The
genius diadem encourages you to learn things for yourself
rather than actually attempting to Recall Knowledge for
you, though you or your allies might be able to play on its
arrogance using Deception to trick it into doing so. In addition

to allowing you to activate it, the diadem can use the diadem
of intellect’s hypercognition activation with its own actions,
though if it does so, the diadem gains the benefits instead of
you. Only the diadem can use the following activation.
Activate [two-actions] (command, Interact) Frequency once per hour;
Effect The genius diadem casts 7th-level feeblemind.

MARTYR’S SHIELD
RARE

LG

ABJURATION

ITEM 7
DIVINE

introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools

INTELLIGENT

Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
Perception +12; precise vision 30 feet, imprecise hearing 30 feet
Communication speech (Common and Celestial)
Skills Diplomacy +15, Religion +13
Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +4
Will +15
A martyr’s shield is a lesser sturdy shield imbued with the
compassion of a devout champion of a righteous deity, like
Iomedae or Vildeis, who sacrificed themself to save an ally. In
addition to good-naturedly attempting to convert you to its
religion, the martyr’s shield can use 1 reaction each round that,
when raised, it uses to Shield Block to protect an ally adjacent to
you, with the effects of the Shield Warden feat (Core Rulebook
112). The martyr’s shield uses this reaction whether you would
prefer it did so or not. The martyr’s shield can be upgraded to a
stronger form of sturdy shield by paying the difference in cost
between its current type of sturdy shield and the new type.

SINGING SWORD
RARE

2

CG ENCHANTMENT INTELLIGENT

Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

ITEM 5

4121843

OCCULT

Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
Perception +11; precise vision 30 feet, imprecise hearing 30 feet
Communication speech (Common and four other common
languages)
Skills Performance +15
Int +2, Wis +2, Cha +4
Will +13 (+17 against attempts to quiet its singing)
A singing sword is a +1 striking longsword imbued with the
consciousness of a boisterous bard, and therefore constantly
sings at all times. A singing sword can’t stop singing and
in fact communicates in no way other than by singing. A
successful Diplomacy or Intimidation check against its Will
DC can convince it to quiet its singing to a whisper for 10
minutes, or 20 minutes on a critical success, though it quickly
grows displeased at anyone who attempts this repeatedly.
The singing sword can spend its actions to attack on its own,
with the effects of a dancing weapon’s activation, except
that its attack modifier is +12. Additionally, it can perform
the following activations; each casts a composition spell and
follows all the usual rules for compositions.
Activate [one-action] (command) Frequency once per minute; Effect The
singing sword casts inspire courage.
Activate [one-action] (command) Frequency once per minute; Effect The
singing sword casts inspire defense.
Activate [reaction] (command) Frequency once per hour; Trigger You or
an ally within 60 feet rolls a saving throw against an auditory
effect; Effect The singing sword casts counter performance.

89

18833897

4121844

4121844


Gamemastery Guide

CURSED ITEMS

While magical items can be potent weapons in any adventurer’s arsenal, magic can be
unpredictable and is not always benign. Cursed items are unusual magical creations that
have a malicious effect on the unwary and can force its wielders into difficult choices.
Cursed items are almost never made intentionally; even
(or animal or plant product) within the bag, roll a DC 9 flat
those who set out to curse an item find the task incredibly
check. On a success, the bag ignores the intrusion. On a failure,
difficult or even impossible. These items are the results
the bag devours the triggering material, removing it from this
of magical mishaps, shoddy crafting, or sinister forces
realm of existence; the bag can’t eat artifacts or other similarly
interfering with the creation. Many specify how
hard-to-destroy items. If the triggering material is
their curses work, but curses are fickle, and you
not entirely inside of the bag, such as when someone
as the GM determine how curses play out in
reaches a hand inside, the bag of devouring attempts
your game. Due to these factors, an item with
to pull it completely inside the bag using a Grapple
the cursed trait is always rare.
action, with an Athletics bonus determined
Identifying Cursed Items: Cursed
by the type of bag. On a success, it devours
items often appear to be ordinary
the victim or object entirely.
magical items, as the magic that
Type I; Level 7; Athletics Bonus +15; acts as
warps their function also disguises
a type II bag of holding
their curses from detection. Unless
Type II; Level 11; Athletics Bonus +21; acts
you roll a critical success when
as a type III bag of holding
Identifying a cursed item, it simply
Type III; Level 13; Athletics Bonus +24;
appears as something helpful or
acts as a type IV bag of holding
benign. A critical success reveals
both the presence of the curse and the
BAG OF WEASELS
ITEM 4
exact nature of the curse.
RARE CONJURATION CURSED EXTRADIMENSIONAL MAGICAL
BAG OF DEVOURING
Removing Cursed Items: Many cursed
Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk 1
items can’t be discarded. Some use magic to
This item appears to be and functions as a type I
fuse to the wielder, making it impossible to remove the
bag of holding, until you try to retrieve an item from the bag.
item, while others attune to their owner and return even
Whenever you retrieve an item from the bag of weasels, roll
if discarded. (This section uses the term “fuse” to describe
a DC 11 flat check. On a success, you retrieve the item as
either situation.) In many cases, this feature reveals itself
normal. On a failure, the item you retrieve is transformed into
only after the cursed item has been triggered for the first
a weasel; this doesn’t affect artifacts, cursed items, or other
time or after investing the item for the first time, allowing
hard-to-destroy items.
the user to develop a false sense of security. Fused cursed
This weasel has the statistics of a giant rat (Pathfinder
items can be removed by targeting the item’s owner
Bestiary 276), except that it is Tiny and exudes an aura of
with a remove curse spell or similar magic. If the spell
transmutation magic. The weasel has no loyalty to you and
is successful, the item can be discarded, but nothing
typically attempts to escape as quickly as possible. If the
prevents the item from cursing the same creature again
weasel is targeted with a remove curse spell or a similar
if the conditions are met, so it’s best to dispose of the
magical effect, it transforms back into the original item that
item quickly. Invested cursed items that can’t be removed
was taken from the bag of weasels. If it dies or is slain, the
continue to count against a character’s invested items,
weasel disappears and the item is permanently destroyed.
even without reinvesting them each day.
Because the weasel is a transformed item, you don’t gain any
benefit you would receive from attacking a creature, defeating
one, damaging one, or the like, but you do gain any benefit
The following are a few examples of cursed items.
you would gain from destroying an item.

18833898

18833898

4121844

SPECIFIC CURSED ITEMS
BAG OF DEVOURING
RARE

ITEM 7+

CONJURATION CURSED EXTRADIMENSIONAL

MAGICAL

Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk 1
This item appears to be and functions as a bag of holding,
but is actually a feeding orifice of a bizarre extradimensional
creature. Any animal or vegetable matter put in the bag has a
chance of triggering the bag’s interest. Whenever you reach
into the bag to retrieve an item or place an animal or plant

BOOTS OF DANCING
RARE

CURSED ENCHANTMENT INVESTED

ITEM 11
MAGICAL

Usage worn shoes; Bulk L
These boots act as greater boots of elvenkind, but they react
wildly to strong physical exertion. While you wear the boots,
the curse activates whenever you attempt an Athletics check
or Stride more than once in a single round during an encounter.
The boots cast an 8th-level uncontrollable dance spell on you,

90

18833898

4121845

4121845

18833899

18833899


Tools

and you automatically fail your save. Once the curse
has activated for the first time, the boots fuse to you.

CLOAK OF IMMOLATION
RARE

ITEM 7

CURSED EVOCATION INVESTED

MAGICAL

Usage worn cloak; Bulk L
Appearing as a magic cloak such as a cloak of
elvenkind, this garment is made of highly volatile
fabric. While wearing it, if you take fire damage,
you also take 1d10 persistent fire damage. Taking
fire damage while the persistent fire damage is in
effect has no additional effect. You can extinguish
the persistent fire damage as normal.
Any creature that hits you with a melee unarmed
attack while you are taking this persistent fire damage
takes fire damage equal to the persistent fire damage you
took on your previous turn. Once the curse has activated for
the first time, the boots fuse to you.

GLOVES OF CARELESSNESS
RARE

ITEM 7

ABJURATION CURSED EXTRADIMENSIONAL INVESTED MAGICAL

Usage worn gloves; Bulk L
These gloves appear and function as gloves of storing but
repel any item not stored in the gloves. When wearing them,
whenever you Interact to draw or pick up an item, roll a DC
11 flat check. On a success, you do so as normal. On a failure,
you instead fling the item 15 feet in a random direction. You
can use a reaction to attempt a DC 23 Reflex save, causing the
item to land at your feet instead if you succeed. Removing the
stored item from the gloves does not trigger the item’s curse.
The first time the curse activates, the gloves fuse to you.

MEDUSA ARMOR
RARE

ITEM 14

CURSED INVESTED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION

Usage worn armor; Bulk 3
This +2 adamantine scale mail appears to have a fortification
rune but grants none of its effects. Whenever you are critically
hit, after taking damage, you become petrified for 1 round.
Once the curse has activated for the first time, the armor fuses
to you.

MONKEY’S PAW
RARE

CURSED

MAGICAL

ITEM 20
MISFORTUNE

NECROMANCY

Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
This dried, gnarled hand is clenched in a fist, waiting for
a creature to pick it up. When you pick up the monkey’s
paw, the hand opens, revealing three withered fingers. The
monkey’s paw grants you three wishes, curling one finger
after every one. Once you pick up the monkey’s paw, you
cannot discard the hand until it returns to a clenched fist
by casting its three wishes. Any attempts to discard the
hand, even with the effects of a miracle or wish spell, are
unsuccessful as the monkey’s paw reappears among your
possessions within 1d4 hours; it doesn’t work for any
other creature in the intervening time. The hand returns
even if another creature steals it from you. Once you make

all three wishes, the monkey’s paw uses
plane shift to travel to a random point in
the multiverse.
Whenever the monkey’s paw hears you utter a
statement that sounds like a wish, even if you don’t
use the words “I wish,” it activates and grants a twisted,
horrifying version of your wish, producing any effect within
the possibility of alter reality, miracle, primal phenomenon, or
wish, and potentially a greater effect at the GM’s discretion.

MONKEY’S PAW

NECKLACE OF STRANGULATION
RARE

CURSED INVESTED

MAGICAL

ITEM 15

TRANSMUTATION

Usage worn necklace; Bulk L
This beautiful necklace appears to be a magical item such
as a necklace of fireballs or a pendant of the occult. When
invested, it magically locks in place, suspiciously tightly, and
fuses to you. When you enter a situation of extreme stress
(as determined by the GM), the necklace tightens around your
neck, suffocating you (Core Rulebook 478) and dealing 30
bludgeoning damage to you at the end of each of your turns.
Once per round, you can spend a single action to attempt a
DC 34 Athletics check or Fortitude save; success means you
don’t take the damage on your current turn, but you continue
suffocating. The necklace loosens after you’ve been dead for
a month.

POISONOUS CLOAK
RARE

CURSED INVESTED

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

ITEM 13+
MAGICAL

4121845

TRANSMUTATION

Usage worn cloak; Bulk L
This innocuous-looking cloak is associated with a type of
poison, set at the cloak’s creation. It often appears as a
clandestine cloak or a cloak of the bat to the unaware. When
you invest this cloak, you lose any resistance to poison
damage, and anytime you take piercing or slashing damage in
combat, you are exposed to the type of poison associated with
the poisonous cloak with no onset, even if it’s not an injury
poison. Once the curse has activated for the first time, the
cloak fuses to you.
Type I; Level 6; Poison giant scorpion venom
Type II; Level 10; Poison wolfsbane
Type III; Level 13; Poison purple worm venom
Type IV; Level 17; Poison hemlock

RING OF TRUTH
RARE

CURSED

ENCHANTMENT INVESTED

ITEM 10
MAGICAL

Usage worn; Bulk —
This ring appears to be a ring of lies, but when invested, close
investigation reveals angelic wings and divine creatures
hidden on the face of the ring. When you invest the ring, you
are rendered unable to tell a deliberate lie, in either speech
or writing. If you attempt to omit the truth or phrase things
truthfully but deceptively, roll a DC 11 flat check; on a failure,
the ring itself blurts out the entire truth (as you believe it) as
an answer. Keeping silent does not activate the ring’s curse.
Once the curse has activated for the first time, the ring fuses
to you.

91

18833899

4121846

4121846


Gamemastery Guide

STONE OF WEIGHT
RARE

CONJURATION

ITEM 2

CURSED

MAGICAL

Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Also known as a loadstone, this small stone appears nonmagical and has a lovely sheen, giving the impression that
it could be a valuable or a notable item or a magic stone of
some kind. When you’ve carried the stone on your person for
1 minute, its curse activates: the stone’s size does not change,
but it suddenly increases in weight to 5 Bulk. This additional
weight does not cause the stone to deal more damage if
thrown or used as a weapon. It reappears in your possessions
within 1 minute if you discard it, and can’t be destroyed or
thrown away permanently, or even placed in a container that
would reduce or negate its Bulk (like a bag of holding), until
it is subject to a remove curse spell or similar magic effect.
Once the curse has activated for the first time,
the stone fuses to you.

Most curses alter a base item. Item curses alter their base
item, much like a property rune, though they can’t be
detected or identified unless a creature critically succeeds
at a check to Identify the Item. A curse can be applied to
the specific types of magic items listed in its Usage entry.
Curses typically can’t be removed or transferred from the
item, though at your discretion, either might be possible
after the curse is broken. If the PCs manage to break the
curse, the newly uncursed item could be quite valuable.

ARROW ATTRACTING
RARE

ABJURATION

CURSED

CURSE 8
MAGICAL

Usage curses armor or shield
An item affected by an arrow attracting curse protects you
normally, but it draws ranged attacks like a magnet. Whenever
a creature within 120 feet misses with a ranged attack, it
must immediately reroll the attack against your AC, affecting
you depending on the result of the new attack roll. The arrow
attraction curse activates only if you could have been a
legitimate target. Creatures that intentionally attempt to miss
a ranged attack do not activate an arrow attraction curse. Once
the curse has activated for the first time, the item fuses to you.

ARSONOUS
RARE

CURSE 7

CURSED EVOCATION

FIRE

MAGICAL

Usage curses a ring, staff, or wand
An arsonous curse creates flaws in the mystic pathways
that channel magic through an item, allowing excess
power to escape as sparks. Whenever you activate
the magic item, a random ally within 30 feet
takes 1d10 persistent fire damage. If no ally
is in range, you take the damage instead. At
the GM’s discretion, this curse might ignite an unattended
object or the surrounding environment instead.

18833900

18833900

ITEM CURSES

BACKBITING
RARE

4121846

CURSE 4

CURSED EVOCATION

MAGICAL

Usage curses a weapon
A weapon with the backbiting curse warps space
in response to catastrophic mishaps. Whenever
you critically fail at a Strike with this weapon,
the weapon curls around (or its projectile
swerves through the air) to strike you in the back
as though you hit yourself, automatically dealing
maximum damage to you.

BLOODBITER
RARE

POISONOUS CLOAK

CURSED

CURSE 6
MAGICAL

NECROMANCY

Usage curses a piercing or slashing weapon
A bloodbiter weapon is awakened by
violence and fueled by blood. When you make
a successful attack with the weapon, it inflicts a
wound that deals 1d6 persistent bleed damage (in
addition to its normal damage), but it also deals 1d6
persistent bleed damage to you. The curse remains

92

18833900

4121847

4121847

18833901

18833901


Tools

dormant until the weapon hits a creature, at which point black
thorns protrude from the weapon and dig into your body; the
weapon fuses to you and you can’t use the hand that holds
the weapon for any other purpose. If the weapon is
two-handed, it attaches itself to only a single hand
(GM’s choice).

DEGENERATING
RARE

ACID

CURSED

in their wielders, demanding style over pragmatism. Whenever
you reduce a foe to 0 Hit Points, you lose all remaining actions
on your turn, as you are compelled to flourish, gloat, pose, or
otherwise waste your time in response.

OVERDRAMATIC
RARE

CURSE 5
NECROMANCY MAGICAL

RARE

CURSED

CURSE 9
MAGICAL

RAUCOUS
RING OF TRUTH

TRANSMUTATION

Usage curses gear used for skills or a weapon
The dependent curse makes an item function properly only under
certain circumstances. Whenever you use the item to perform a
skill check or use the weapon in combat, your degree of success
is one worse than the result you rolled unless those specific
conditions are met. The most common types of dependent
curses are nocturnal or diurnal—functioning normally only
at night or only during the day, respectively—but more
restrictive curses do exist, such as a curse that restricts
the item’s use to underground or a curse that allows the
item to function effectively only during autumn.

DREARY
RARE

CONJURATION CURSED

MAGICAL

Usage curses a weapon
The weapon flashes excessive light with each attack.
On a critical hit with the weapon, you are blinded
until the end of your turn and take the effects of a
faerie fire spell until the start of your next turn.

Usage curses a weapon
Failure makes the weapon crumble. Whenever you
critically fail an attack roll with the weapon, the
degenerating curse deals 1d10 acid damage to the
weapon, ignoring its Hardness and resistances.

DEPENDENT

CURSE 5

CURSED EVOCATION

CURSE 3

RARE

CURSED

introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules

CURSE 3
MAGICAL

TRANSMUTATION

Usage curses gear or a weapon
While more annoying than deadly, a raucous curse is the bane
of subtlety. Whenever you use the affected item, you must
loudly yell what you are attempting to do with it, ruining any
attempts at stealth. Failure to announce your action or speak
at an appropriate volume automatically causes the attempted
action to become a critical failure.

RAVENOUS
RARE

2

CURSED EVOCATION

NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

CURSE 1
MAGICAL

Usage curses a ring, staff, or wand
A ravenous curse draws power from the wielder’s body.
Whenever you activate the item, you become incredibly
hungry and immediately begin to starve (Core Rulebook 500).
You require 10 times as much food as normal for the next day.

4121847

MAGICAL

Usage curses armor
STAINING
CURSE 1
When you invest this armor, a personal-sized cloud appears
RARE CURSED MAGICAL TRANSMUTATION
over your head and begins to rain on you, and the armor
Usage curses gear or a weapon
fuses to you. This extinguishes uncovered flames and
This property is associated with a specific color, which is
soaks other objects you are carrying or holding, potentially
defined at the time of the curse’s creation. Whenever you use
ruining them. Cold conditions are one step worse
the affected equipment while taking a manipulate
under the cloud, and at the GM’s discretion it
action with another object, the second object is
BLOODBITER
might cause other problems, such as interfering
permanently stained the associated color. For
with sleep.
instance, if you used a set of yellow staining lockpicks
to open a door, the lock would permanently become yellow. This
ERRATIC TRANSPOSING
CURSE 11
color change does not otherwise unnaturally persist and can be
changed via any normal mundane or magical means.
RARE CONJURATION CURSED MAGICAL
Usage curses a weapon
This curse bursts with uncontrolled teleportation magic
WITHERING
CURSE 13
when activated, unreliably transporting creatures across
RARE CURSED MAGICAL NECROMANCY
the battlefield. On a critical hit with the affected weapon,
Usage curses a ring, staff, or wand
you and an ally within 60 feet (chosen randomly) teleport
A withering curse shrivels vulnerable flesh. Whenever you
to switch places with one another. If either of the affected
activate the item, one of your fingers turns black and falls off.
creatures is unable to entirely fit within its new space, the
You take a –1 status penalty to Thievery checks and Dexteritycreature is placed in the nearest available squares instead.
based attack rolls with a hand missing two or three fingers; if
you lose more than four fingers on one hand, you can’t use that
GRANDSTANDING
CURSE 11
hand to hold objects or use manipulate actions. These fingers
can be replaced by magic but are otherwise gone forever. The
RARE CURSED ENCHANTMENT MAGICAL
Usage curses a weapon
GM has the final say on how creatures with unusual appendages
Weapons with the grandstanding curse inspire overconfidence
or numbers of fingers are affected by this curse.

93

18833901

4121848

4121848


Gamemastery Guide

RELICS

Some extraordinary magic items grow in power along with a character, gaining abilities
that add to an adventurer’s legend. These are called relics, and owning one can define a
character more than any other magic item could.
Relics begin as a simple item, called a relic seed, which is
little more than a functional item with a minor magical
effect associated with it. As the owner of the relic grows
in power, so does the relic. It develops gifts, which are
new magical abilities and activations. These abilities
might be themed to the relic, the character, or the nature
of the campaign. If a relic is passed to another character,
this process begins anew, sometimes granting the same
abilities again over time, but possibly unlocking entirely
new powers. If someone else takes the relic from its
owner, it usually works for a while, though it might lose
its power incrementally over time if not returned to its
owner. How the relic changes in such a circumstance is
up to you, and should fit the story.
The decision to add relics to the game is entirely up to
you as the GM. If you decide to add them, you’ll need to
adjust treasure somewhat. It’s also wise to consider how
many players you expect to end up with relics. Will they

18833902

18833902

each get one? Or will there be just one or two tied to the
theme of the campaign?

DISCOVERING A RELIC

Some relics might begin as ordinary items with a rich
history. They might be part of a character’s starting gear,
only to have their true powers uncovered later during play.
Other relics can be acquired during play as part of the
ongoing story. Regardless of their origin, these powerful
items might not appear to be much at first, but they contain
the potential to become something truly great.
For example, an old, tarnished amulet found around
the neck of a buried king might turn out to be an item of
deep historical significance that awakens to great power.
The seemingly ordinary family sword, passed down to
each new generation, might unlock hidden potential
through the deeds of its owner.
The PCs might immediately recognize a relic for its
ability, or they might carry it for a time before its true
nature becomes apparent. The story of a relic should be a
tale of discovery. At first, a relic’s wielder likely does not
fully understand the item’s power, or might be unable to
use it, learning of its abilities only after a momentous event
or fortuitous breakthrough. Ultimately, relics are powerful
tools in service of the story, working as a valuable tie to
the narrative, but their growth and development are in your
hands. Because of the place relics hold in the story, they
aren’t available for purchase, nor can they be crafted.
Pay attention to the characters’ backstories for potential
relics, and look for spots in your narrative that might be
suitable for campaign relics. If you’re planning to use
relics in your game, let the players know in advance,
since their ideas and plans can guide you and
give them greater investment in the relics.

4121848

BACKGROUND RELICS
A background relic is tied to the history of a character,
and its form and abilities should draw inspiration from
the story of their character’s life or the past of the item.
The relic could be a gift from a friend or mentor, an
heirloom from the character’s family, a found object
from their upbringing, or even the first item they ever
crafted. The player should select the form of the relic
(a battered longsword, a copper ring, or a threadbare
red cloak, for example).

CAMPAIGN RELICS
A campaign relic is drawn from the ongoing story of the
campaign. You decide the entirety of the item, from its

94

18833902

4121849

4121849

18833903

18833903


Tools

form to its aspects (described below) as part of the story
of the campaign. Use campaign relics to reinforce and
foreshadow the themes of your game. Relics come to those
who need them to do great deeds, after all, so finding a
relic with the perfect aspects for your future challenges is
entirely likely. Unlike background relics, campaign relics
typically have magical abilities when first found.

RELIC ASPECTS

Each relic is associated with aspects—typically two—that
speak to its overall concept and purpose. The individual
gifts each have an associated aspect. You should almost
always select gifts that have an aspect matching one of
those found on the relic. For example, a brass dagger
recovered from the City of Brass might have the fire and
mind aspects, which means that it could have the flare bolt
gift (which has the fire aspect), but not the rolling geode
gift (which has the earth aspect).
Usually you can determine at least one aspect of a relic
easily by looking at the history of the item or personality
of the character. For example, if a player decides that their
background relic is a rusty mace wielded by the character’s
great grandmother in battle against rising undead hordes,
the mace might have the life aspect, as it was used to slay
countless undead creatures. There’s no harm in letting the
player choose an aspect for a background relic; through
play, the item will reveal another aspect associated with
it. In the previous example, the mace might reveal itself
to have powers against demons as well, in which case its
aspects might be celestial and life.

ADVANCING A RELIC

As a relic’s bearer performs mighty deeds and advances their
story, the relic gets stronger. The most basic advancement
for a relic is its level, which always matches that of its
owner. Weapons and armor can gain fundamental runes
normally. You decide what, if any, property runes can be
added to a given relic; by default, they can’t have property
runes, like any other specific item.
The more complex advancement comes from gifts.
Table 2–22: Relic Gifts shows the typical number of gifts
a relic should have at a given level, but relics don’t follow
this strictly. Rather, gifts arise according to the pace of
the story, the needs of the campaign, and the relationship
between the character and the relic. Generally speaking,
this results in a relic gaining one gift for every 4 levels
its bearer has, but this might fluctuate as the campaign
progresses. For example, a relic might gain its first gift at
4th level after the bearer defeats a powerful foe. It might
then gain its second at 7th, after they perform a special
ritual. That same relic might not gain another gift until
13th level and then again at 16th as the player reaches
other major milestones.
The gift types—minor, major, and grand—indicate
their general power level. Again, the table indicates what’s
generally appropriate at certain levels, but you can alter them

as you see fit. You should usually avoid giving a minor gift at
10th level or higher, because it just won’t be that impressive,
though some of them scale well enough to be interesting at
higher levels. The Gold Piece Equivalent entry for each gift
helps you determine how much you should reduce treasure
when using relics (see Adjusting Treasure below).

Minimum
Level
1st
5th
9th
13th
17th

introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools

TABLE 2–22: RELIC GIFTS
Number of
Gifts
1
2
3
4
5

2

Gift
Type
Minor
Minor
Major
Major
Grand

Gold Piece
Equivalent
20 gp
160 gp
700 gp
3,000 gp
15,000 gp

You decide what gifts a relic gains, generally by either
selecting a single gift or offering two paths for the relic to
grow and allowing the player to choose, but this should
be informed by the story and the nature of the character
bearing the relic. A relic should complement the bearer,
bolstering the bearer’s strengths and helping to overcome
their weaknesses. Within that framework, you should try to
maintain a cohesive theme for the relic.

Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

ADJUSTING TREASURE

When you incorporate relics into your game, you can
adjust the treasure gained by the party down to account
for the relics increasing in power. Essentially, some of
the treasure from Table 10–9: Party Treasure by Level
on page 509 of the Core Rulebook should be replaced
with relic seeds and gifts instead. You can use the relic’s
minimum level, replacing a permanent item of that level,
or you can use the gp equivalent. Keep in mind that relic
gifts are often a little more powerful than other items
with the same Price even when they start out, and they
often scale without any additional costs, so PCs with
relics will usually be a bit more powerful.
If you prefer, you can grant relics in addition to other
rewards. This means PCs will be much more powerful,
but you’re rewarding their investment in the story.

4121849

MAKING RELIC SEEDS

A relic seed can be quite simple: imagine a standard
item with two aspects and an appearance that matches
the theme. You can also use an existing magic item for
a campaign relic; pick two aspects for it, and tweak its
appearance or characteristics to make it clearly different
from other items of its type. You can choose a tradition
for the seed and apply that trait to the seed and all the
gifts of the seed. This tradition might be derived from
the background of the item, or it might appear or change
through story moments involving the relic.
If you want a relic to have an additional special benefit,
you can design it to grant a bonus to a skill, typically a +1
item bonus for a 3rd-level relic.

95

18833903

4121850

4121850


Gamemastery Guide

PLAYER-DRIVEN RELICS
Though these rules assume you as the GM are providing relic
gifts as a form of treasure with input from the players, you can
instead have the players make all the decisions for their relics.
Encourage the players to choose different styles of items and
aspects to match their characters’ themes, rather than simply
choosing the most powerful combination of options. Have
players describe how their relic gets more powerful in the
story. What acts from previous sessions lent the relic power?
What special meditations or practices did they perform to
unlock new gifts? How does it feel to have the relic grow?
As the item and the character level up, the player
chooses which gifts the item gets from the list as a part of
character advancement. You still adjust treasure as normal
for incorporating relics into your game. In fact, if the player
tries to optimize the combinations, they will likely be more
powerful than under the standard method.

RELIC GIFTS

Gifts are divided up into three tiers. Minor gifts grant useful,
often scaling abilities and are available early in a character’s
career. Major gifts define a relic, determining its true purpose
and granting powerful abilities. Grand gifts are the pinnacle
of power, and most relics never have more than one.
The more gifts there are of one aspect, the more the
relic reflects that aspect, and the more influence the aspect
has on the character who wields it. An item with multiple
shadow gifts might begin to lose its color. With four or
five, the character that wields it might take on an ashen
tone and the relic might become entirely made of shadow.

18833904

18833904

GIFT SAVES AND SPELL ATTACK ROLLS

AIR GIFTS
AIR

ELECTRICITY

MINOR GIFT
EVOCATION

Aspect air
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Effect A spark flashes out
from the relic toward a creature within 20 feet. This spark
deals 1d12 electricity damage (basic Reflex save). The
damage increases by 1d12 at 6th level and by another 1d12
every 4 levels thereafter.

FEATHER STEPS
AIR

WIND BARRIER
ABJURATION

MINOR GIFT

TRANSMUTATION

Aspect air; Prerequisites The relic is a worn item.
While wearing the relic, you do not trigger traps that use weight
or pressure plates as a trigger. Also, whenever you fall, you

MINOR GIFT

AIR

Aspect air
Activate [one-action] command; Effect An invisible barrier of air deflects
ranged attacks, granting you a +2 circumstance bonus to
AC against ranged attacks until the beginning of your next
turn. At 13th level, this increases to a +3 circumstance
bonus to AC against ranged attacks.

LIGHTNING STORM
AIR

ELECTRICITY

MAJOR GIFT

EVOCATION

Aspect air
Activate [two-actions] command; Effect The relic surrounds you with a
storm of wind, rain, and lightning in a 30-foot emanation.
This storm is difficult terrain for creatures other than you.
Any creature other than you that enters or starts its turn
in the storm takes 1d12 electricity damage, with a basic
Reflex save (2d12 damage at 15th level). You can Sustain
this Activation up to 1 minute.

PROPELLING WINDS
AIR

MAJOR GIFT

TRANSMUTATION

Aspect air
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Frequency once per hour;
Effect The relic casts fly targeting you.

LIVING STORM
AIR

Many gifts allow for a saving throw or have other abilities
that change as the relic goes up in level. The DC for any
saving throw called for by a gift is its owner’s class DC or
spell DC. The spell attack modifier of a gift is 10 lower than
that DC. A relic’s counteract modifier is equal to its owner’s
counteract modifier.

DEADLY SPARK

reduce the falling damage by the level of the relic. If this would
reduce the falling damage to 0, you land on your feet and are
not prone. The relic grants a +1 item bonus to Athletics checks
made to Jump, increasing to +2 at 9th level and +3 at 17th level.

ELECTRICITY

4121850

GRAND GIFT
EVOCATION

Aspect air
The relic grants you a fly Speed equal to your Speed or 60 feet,
whichever is greater. In addition, a creature that Strikes you
with a melee attack takes 5 electricity damage, and you can
cast 5th-level lightning bolt as an innate spell.

BEAST GIFTS
BEAST SENSES

MINOR GIFT

TRANSMUTATION

Aspect beast; Prerequisites The relic is a worn item.
The relic grants you an animal’s acute senses as long as you
wear it. You gain low-light vision. If you already have low-light
vision, you instead gain darkvision. At 10th level, the relic
grants you imprecise scent with a range of 10 feet.

CALL OF THE WILD

MINOR GIFT

TRANSMUTATION

Aspect beast
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Frequency once per day; Effect
Your relic summons a creature to fight at your side, casting
summon animal with a level of half the item’s level rounded up.
You can Sustain this Activation as you would the spell.

96

18833904

4121851

4121851

18833905

18833905


Tools

RUNES AS GIFTS
You can substitute runes for gifts. If you choose to allow property runes on the relic, you’ll want them to take up rune slots. Otherwise,
you can give as many or few as you prefer, just like any other gifts. Runes are sorted into minor, major, and grand categories, but you
should use their normal level and Price when you adjust treasure, instead of the number and levels on the Table 2–22. If you’re using
the player-driven relics variant, it’s recommended you do not include this option.

AIR

FIRE

Armor (Major) energy-resistant or greater energy-resistant
(cold or electricity), invisibility; Armor (Grand) ethereal
Weapon (Minor) returning; Weapon (Major) dancing,
shock, thundering; Weapon (Grand) greater shock, greater
thundering

Armor (Minor) energy-resistant or greater energy-resistant
(fire)
Weapon (Minor) flaming; Weapon (Major) greater flaming

LIFE

CELESTIAL

Weapon (Minor) disrupting; Weapon (Major) greater
disrupting

Weapon (Major) anarchic (azata-themed), axiomatic (archonthemed), holy

MIND
PLANT

Weapon (Minor) ghost touch, wounding

EARTH

FIEND
Armor (Minor) energy-resistant or greater energy-resistant
(acid, cold, or fire)
Weapon (Major) anarchic (demon-themed), axiomatic
(devil-themed), unholy

MORPH

MINOR GIFT

TRANSMUTATION

Aspect beast; Prerequisites The relic is a worn item.
Activate [one-action] command; Effect Your hands transform into a pair
of claws. These grant you a claw unarmed attack that deals
1d6 slashing damage and has the agile and finesse traits.
This lasts until you Dismiss the effect.

FORM OF FURY

MAJOR GIFT

TRANSMUTATION

Aspect beast; Prerequisites The relic is a worn item.
Activate [two-actions] command, envision; Frequency twice per day;
Effect Calling upon the bestial nature within, you change
shape into that of an animal. The relic casts animal form on
you, transforming you into the same type of animal every
time, chosen when the gift is gained; the spell level is half
the item’s level, rounded down.
At 11th level, the spell is 5th level, and the spell level goes
up by 1 for every 2 levels beyond that.

TRACK OF THE BEAST
TRANSMUTATION

Aspect beast

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules

GLOSSARY
and INDEX

Weapon (Minor) shifting

Armor (Minor) energy-resistant or greater energy-resistant
(acid); Armor (Major) fortification; Armor (Grand) greater
fortification
Weapon (Minor) shifting

FERAL CLAWS

introduction

NPC Gallery

Armor (Minor) glamered; Armor (Major) invisibility

DEATH

2

MAJOR GIFT

SHADOW
Armor (Minor) shadow; Armor (Major) greater shadow;
Armor (Grand) ethereal, major shadow

WATER
Armor (Minor) energy-resistant or greater energy-resistant
(cold or fire), slick; Armor (Major) greater or major slick
Weapon (Minor) shifting

4121851

The spirit of an animal fills you. The relic gives one of the following
benefits, chosen by the GM when the relic gains this gift.
• A +10-foot status bonus to your land Speed.
• A climb Speed equal to your land Speed.
• A swim Speed equal to your land Speed.

FORM OF VENGEANCE

GRAND GIFT

TRANSMUTATION

Aspect beast; Prerequisites form of fury gift
Whenever you use the relic’s form of fury activation, it can cast
aerial form or dinosaur form instead of animal form. Like form of
fury, these spells also turn you into the same type of animal each
time (so you have three forms you can assume in total, one from
each spell). The spell level is the same as defined in form of fury.
While transformed, you can switch from one of the three
forms to another by Sustaining the Activation. This doesn’t
change the duration.

CELESTIAL GIFTS
DIVINE RETRIBUTION

MINOR GIFT

EVOCATION

Aspect celestial; Prerequisites The relic is a weapon.

97

18833905

4121852

4121852


Gamemastery Guide

Activate [two-actions] command; Effect Drawing upon divine fury, you
single out a target that damaged you or an ally within the
past round and fill your relic with divine vengeance against
them. Make a Strike against that foe, dealing an additional
damage die on a hit. If the target is evil, it is also enfeebled
1 until the start of your next turn on a hit (or enfeebled 2
on a critical hit).

HEAVEN’S GRACE

Aspect celestial; Prerequisites The relic
is a worn item.
The heavens protect you from harm.
While wearing the relic, you gain a +1
status bonus to AC against attacks by
fiends and resistance to an energy type
corresponding to the relic’s celestial
origin (such as sonic resistance from a
choral angel). The resistance is equal to
half the relic’s level (minimum 1).

HEALING

NECROMANCY

Aspect celestial
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Frequency once per
day; Effect At your invitation, a celestial imbues your
body with the divine. You gain 50 additional Hit Points,
increasing both your maximum and current Hit Points,
as well as weakness 10 to
evil damage. If the relic has
the righteous call gift, this
activation grants the effects
of that gift as well, without
expending its daily use.
You can Dismiss the effect.
If you do, you can unleash a
wave of holy power, causing the relic
to cast an 8th-level divine
decree, choosing good for
the alignment.

DEATH GIFTS
DEATH GAZE

POSITIVE

Aspect celestial
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact;
Frequency once per hour; Effect Placing your hand on
yourself or an ally, you heal their wounds and bolster their
spirit. The target regains 1d8 HP per item level and reduces
their frightened value by 1.

HOLY LIGHT

GRAND GIFT

CONJURATION GOOD

WORD OF FAITH MINOR GIFT

18833906

18833906

MINOR GIFT

ABJURATION

ANGELIC VESSEL

MAJOR GIFT

EVOCATION GOOD

Aspect celestial
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Effect Your relic shines with
holy light. This creates bright light in a 30-foot emanation
around the item. Evil creatures in the
area are frightened 1, and can’t lower
their frightened value below 1 as
long as they remain in the light.
Fiends in the area increase any
weakness to good damage they
have by 5. You can Sustain this
Activation for up to 1 minute.

RIGHTEOUS CALL MAJOR GIFT
EVOCATION GOOD

Aspect celestial
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Frequency once per day;
Effect Holy magic fills your armaments, making them true
weapons against evil. For 1 minute, your weapons and
unarmed attacks gain the holy weapon rune while you hold
them. If a weapon is at its limit on property runes, you can
choose one property rune on the weapon to go dormant
while the holy rune takes effect. In addition, any successful
Strikes your allies make while they’re within 30 feet of you
deal 1 additional good damage.

NECROMANCY

MINOR GIFT

NEGATIVE

Aspect death
Activate [two-actions] envision, Interact; Effect Your stare causes a
creature’s flesh to rot and wither away. Target a creature
you can see within 30 feet. Your stare deals 1d6 negative
damage to the creature for every 2 levels the relic has
(minimum 1d6; basic Fortitude save). An undead creature
or other creature with negative healing targeted this
way is instead healed 1d6 HP per level of the relic and is
temporarily immune to this effect for 10 minutes.

LIVING DEATH

4121852

MINOR GIFT

NECROMANCY

Aspect death
You stand on the threshold between
the living and the dead. If you attempt
a saving throw against an effect that
would deal negative damage to you,
such as harm, your outcome is one
degree of success better than what you
rolled. If you roll a critical success and
the effect is capable of healing undead,
you regain HP equal to half the spell’s full
damage. Any positive spell or effect that would
heal you has only half the normal effect. All these effects
apply only if you are a living creature.

SHROUD OF THE AFTERLIFE
NECROMANCY

MINOR GIFT

NEGATIVE

Aspect death
Activate [one-action] command, Interact; Frequency once per day;
Effect You shroud yourself with powers from beyond the
living realm for 1 minute. While this shroud is active, you

98

18833906

4121853

4121853

18833907

18833907


Tools

take on a pallid appearance and gain poison resistance
equal to half the relic’s level and a +1 status bonus to saving
throws against death effects, diseases, effects that would
make you paralyzed, poison, and sleep effects. In addition,
the DC for your recovery checks is 9 + your dying value
instead of 10 + your dying value.

PIERCE THE VEIL

MAJOR GIFT

NECROMANCY

Aspect death; Prerequisites living death gift
The relic allows you to pierce the veil
between life and death. While you are
holding or wearing the relic, you have
the negative healing ability (as though you
were undead; positive energy harms you
and negative energy heals you). In addition,
whenever you are healed by a negative spell or
effect, you gain resistance 5 to all damage (except
force, ghost touch, and positive) until the start of
your next turn. Finally, you gain a +2 item bonus
to all saves against death effects while you are
the bearer of the relic; this increases to a +3 item
bonus at 13th level.

TIDE OF DEATH
NECROMANCY

MAJOR GIFT

NEGATIVE

Aspect death; Prerequisites death gaze gift
You can Activate death gaze with 3 actions instead of 2. If
you do, it targets all living creatures within 30 feet except for
you. If you have the negative healing ability, you can include
yourself to be healed.

GRIM SPECTER

GRAND GIFT

NECROMANCY

Aspect death
Activate [two-actions] command, envision; Frequency once per day;
Effect You can call upon the terrifying powers that fuel
your relic to transform yourself into a specter of death.
You become incorporeal, having no physical body. You are
immune to effects that require a physical body, including
precision damage as well as exposure to most diseases
and poisons. You also have resistance to all damage
equal to half the relic’s level; force damage, ghost touch
attacks, negative damage, and positive damage ignore
this resistance, and the resistance doubles against
non-magical damage.
You can move through solid objects. When inside an
object, you can’t perceive, attack, or Interact with anything
outside it, and you’re always slowed 1 on turns you start
in an object. Corporeal creatures can pass through you
but can’t end their movement in your space. You can’t
attempt Strength-based checks against corporeal creatures
or objects, unless those objects have the ghost touch
property rune. Likewise, corporeal creatures can’t attempt
Strength-based checks against you.
You can Sustain the Activation up to 1 minute.

EARTH GIFTS

introduction

EASE BURDEN
EARTH

MINOR GIFT

TRANSMUTATION

Aspect earth
Your relic draws strength from the earth underfoot to lighten
your load. As long as your relic is on your person and you are
standing on the ground, you can carry 1 more Bulk
than normal before becoming encumbered, and
you increase your maximum Bulk by 2. At 6th
level and every 4 levels thereafter, increase the
Bulk you can carry before becoming encumbered
by 1 and your maximum Bulk by 2.

ROLLING GEODE
CONJURATION

MINOR GIFT

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery

EARTH

Aspect earth
Activate [two-actions] command, envision; Frequency once per
hour; Effect Stone and crystal form a sphere that chases
your foes. You create a geode in an unoccupied square
within 30 feet. You can spend a single action, which has
the concentrate trait, to move the geode up to 30 feet
along the ground. If the geode enters a creature’s space,
the creature must succeed at a basic Reflex save or take
2d6 bludgeoning damage; a creature can take damage this
way only once per turn, even if you roll the geode through its
space multiple times. The geode persists for up to 1 minute or
until destroyed or Dismissed; it has AC 5, Hardness 10, and 40
Hit Points, and is immune to critical hits and precision damage.

SHATTERED EARTH
EARTH

2

GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121853

MINOR GIFT

EVOCATION

Aspect earth
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Frequency once per hour;
Effect Seismic pulses from your relic ripple through the
nearby ground, shaking sharp fragments to the surface.
A 10-foot-radius patch of stone or earth within 60 feet is
transformed into difficult terrain. A creature that enters
an affected square during a move action must succeed at
an Acrobatics check or Reflex save or take 1d6 piercing
damage; it needs to roll only once per move action even if
it moves through several squares. At 6th level and every 4
levels thereafter, increase the damage by 1d6.

RAISE RAMPARTS
CONJURATION

MAJOR GIFT

EARTH

Aspect earth
Activate [three-actions] command, Interact; Frequency once per day;
Effect Your relic reshapes the earth around you. You cast
5th-level wall of stone.

UNDERGROUND BOUNTY
CONJURATION

MAJOR GIFT

EARTH

Aspect earth
Your relic produces metals and stones to empower your
weapons. Each day during your daily preparations, your

99

18833907

4121854

4121854


Gamemastery Guide

LITTLE HELPER

LIVING STATUE

FIENDISH BARGAIN

EARTH

GRAND GIFT

TRANSMUTATION

FIEND GIFTS
CURSE WOUND
CURSE

EVIL

MINOR GIFT

NECROMANCY

Aspect fiend; Prerequisites The relic is a weapon.
Activate [reaction] command; Trigger Your Strike
with your relic deals damage to a creature
within 60 feet; Effect The evil within your
relic curses an enemy’s wound to ensure
they won’t heal. The triggering creature must
attempt a Will save or be unable to restore the
Hit Points lost by damage from the triggering Strike
until its next daily preparations. If you use Curse Wound
on a creature already affected by your Curse Wound, your
previous application expires.

FIENDISH DEFIANCE

DIVINATION

MINOR GIFT

ABJURATION

Aspect fiend; Prerequisites The relic is a worn item.
The fiendish power of your relic offers you more protection
against celestials and allows you to ignore harm. While
wearing the relic, you gain a +1 status bonus to AC against
attacks by celestials and resistance to an energy type
corresponding to the relic’s fiendish origin (such as fire
resistance from a devil). The resistance is equal to half the
relic’s level (minimum 1).

MINOR GIFT

EVIL

Aspect fiend
Your relic awakens to sapience, developing a personality
(usually one that clashes with your own). Your relic has an
alignment corresponding to the type of fiend associated with
the item, precise vision and imprecise hearing each out to 30
feet, the ability to understand and speak one
language you know, and Intelligence,
Wisdom, and Charisma modifiers of +0.
Your item’s total Perception and Will
modifiers are equal to your proficiency
modifiers in Perception and Will, respectively. It
is trained in the Lore associated with its fiend type
(such as Demon Lore), for a total modifier of 2 + the
relic’s level. Unlike most intelligent items, the relic has no
actions or reactions and can’t use any of its own activations.

DIVINATION

Aspect earth
Your relic’s energies have given you
control over the boundary between flesh
and stone. You can cast 6th-level flesh to stone and stone to
flesh as innate spells, each once per day. As long as you are
standing on the earth, your body reflexively petrifies at the
moment you are struck, granting you resistance 5 to physical
damage (except adamantine). This increases to 8 in caves or
subterranean environments.

18833908

18833908

relic conjures a magical shard of silver, cold iron, gold,
or a non-precious stone or metal material of your choice
(such as bronze or granite). If your relic is a weapon,
it immediately absorbs the shard, causing it to gain a
magical sheen of that metal or stone until your next daily
preparations. If your relic is not a weapon, the shard is not
immediately used, and you can touch it to a stone or metal
weapon using an Interact action to give it a magical sheen
of that metal or stone for 10 minutes. While
coated in the magical sheen, the weapon
interacts with weaknesses, resistances, and
the like as if it were made of the stone or metal
from the shard rather than its own. The sheen and the
shard are obviously magical in nature, and if you don’t
use the shard, it disappears when you make your next
daily preparations. At 17th level, add adamantine and
mithral to the available options.

MAJOR GIFT

EVIL

Aspect fiend
Activate [one-action] command; Frequency once per hour; Effect You
bargain with the evil force empowering your relic for a
boon, though you must trade something in return. Select
one of the following benefits to gain.
• Your relic attempts to counteract a harmful condition
affecting you.
• You regain 3d8+16 Hit Points. This is a healing effect.
• You gain a +2 status bonus to attack rolls for 1 minute.
One of the following randomly determined effects occurs
to you in payment, after applying the benefit.
• You are stupefied 1 for 1 minute.
• You are clumsy 1 for 1 minute.
• You lose 1d8 Hit Points.
• You take a –1 penalty to damage rolls for 1
minute.

PROFANE FERVOR
EVIL

4121854

MAJOR GIFT

EVOCATION

Aspect fiend
Activate [two-actions] command,
Interact;
Frequency once per day; Effect Profane
energies twist your weapons, filling
them with rage toward everything good.
For 1 minute, your weapons and unarmed attacks gain the
unholy weapon rune while you hold them. If a weapon is
at its limit on property runes, you can choose one property
rune on the weapon to go dormant while the unholy rune
takes effect. In addition, successful Strikes your allies
make while they’re within 30 feet of you deal 1 additional
evil damage.

COMMAND LEGION

GRAND GIFT

CONJURATION

Aspect fiend
Activate [three-actions] command, envision; Frequency once per day;

100

18833908

4121855

4121855

18833909

18833909


Tools

Effect Your relic opens a gate within itself, overwhelming
your enemies with fiends. You cast 6th-level summon
fiend, but summon two fiends instead of one, and you
can command them both with 1 action to Sustain a
Spell. If the relic has the profane fervor gift, this
activation grants the effects of that gift as well,
without expending its daily use. For the next
minute, you can use the following activation.
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger One of the fiends
summoned by command legion is
banished; Effect You summon that same
fiend again in an adjacent space. The
fiend returns at full Hit Points and all
conditions, spells, and other effects on it
end before you summon it again. However, it does not
recover any limited-use abilities it used before, such
as innate spells or abilities with a Frequency entry.

FIRE GIFTS
FLARE BOLT
EVOCATION

MINOR GIFT

Aspect fire
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Effect A bolt of flames
scorches out from the relic. Make a spell attack roll
with your relic against a target within 30 feet. The bolt
deals 1d6 fire damage for every 2 levels the relic has
(minimum 1d6).
Critical Success The bolt deals double damage, as well as
persistent fire damage equal to the level of the relic.
Success The bolt deals full damage.

ABJURATION

MINOR GIFT

FIRE

Aspect fire
Your relic’s heat keeps the air around you pleasantly warm.
While you are holding or wearing the relic, it protects you
from severe environmental cold. At 9th level, it also protects
you from extreme cold, and at 17th level, it protects you
from incredible cold. At 4th level, the relic also gains the
following activation.
Activate [two-actions] command, envision; Frequency once per day;
Effect Your relic erratically elevates the air temperature
around you, creating heat shimmers that distort your
appearance and grant you the concealed condition for
1 minute. As the nature of this effect still leaves your
location obvious, you can’t use this concealment to Hide
or Sneak.

INCANDESCENT SIGHT
DIVINATION

JET PROPULSION
EVOCATION

MINOR GIFT

FIRE

Aspect fire
Activate [two-actions] command, envision; Frequency once per day;
Effect Your eyes become attuned to heat signatures as
your vision extends into the infrared, granting you a
heatsight precise sense for 1 minute. Your heatsight can see

MAJOR GIFT

FIRE

Aspect fire
Activate [one-action] envision; Frequency once per hour; Effect Flames
from your relic channel through your body, erupting from
your feet, hands, or other limbs with enough force to blast
you across the ground and propel you through the air. For
1 minute, you gain a +10-foot status bonus to your Speed
and gain a fly Speed equal to your new Speed or 20 feet,
whichever is greater. You must end your turn on solid
ground, or you fall.

SEARING WAVE
EVOCATION

FIRE

HEAT HAZE

temperature gradients out to a range of 30 feet, allowing
you to detect living creatures and warm objects even in the
dark. Warm objects block your heatsight even if they are
transparent, such as hot water.

MAJOR GIFT

FIRE

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

Aspect fire
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Effect You
allow a portion of the fire magic housed in
your relic to escape in a direction of your
choice. You deal 1d10 fire damage for every 2
levels of the relic to all creatures in a 30-foot cone
(basic Reflex). You can’t use Searing Wave again for
1d4 rounds.

4121855

BLAZING SOUL
EVOCATION

GRAND GIFT

FIRE

Aspect fire
Fire magic suffuses your body and soul, protecting you from
lesser flames and allowing you to kindle even the smallest
sparks into powerful infernos. You gain fire resistance 10.
The first time each hour you are targeted by a fire effect that
would deal damage, you regain 1d8 HP for every counteract
level of the effect, in addition to taking the damage.
Activate [reaction] envision; Trigger A creature within 60 feet is
critically hit by or critically fails a save against a fire effect
and is not reduced to 0 Hit Points; Effect Flames roar forth
from the triggering creature, dealing 6d6 fire damage to
all creatures in a 15-foot burst centered on it, including
that creature (basic Reflex). You aren’t affected by the
activation, though your allies are. If this damage reduces
the triggering creature to 0 Hit Points, it is reduced to a fine
ash, though its gear remains. You can’t use this activation
again for 1d4 rounds.

LIFE GIFTS
BESTOW LIFE
POSITIVE

MINOR GIFT

TRANSMUTATION

Aspect life
Activate [two-actions] command, envision; Frequency once per day;
Effect An infusion of positive energy from your relic can
temporarily animate an unliving object. You transform an

101

18833909

4121856

4121856


Gamemastery Guide

adjacent inanimate object into an animated object with a
level equal to one-half the relic’s level and appropriate to
the object (so a broom would become an animated broom).
The object pursues a single simple noncombat task you
state when you use Bestow Life, ignoring any subsequent
commands. The object is mindless and pursues the task
single-mindedly and uncreatively. The object remains
animated for 1 hour.

HEALING WAVE
HEALING

MIND GIFTS

MINOR GIFT
POSITIVE

LINGUISTIC NEXUS MINOR GIFT

Aspect life
Activate [two-actions] envision; Frequency
once per hour; Effect You release a
wave of positive energy in a 15‑foot
cone. You and each living target in
the area regain 1d4 HP per level
of the relic.

DIVINATION

HEALING

NECROMANCY

POSITIVE

Aspect life
Life force flows through you, and positive
energy causes your vital essence to burst through your skin
like beads of liquid light. You gain an item bonus equal to half
the relic’s level (minimum 1) to the Hit Points you recover from
positive healing spells; this bonus applies only the first time
per casting that a particular spell heals you.

INEXTINGUISHABLE
NECROMANCY

MAJOR GIFT

POSITIVE

Aspect life
Your connection to life force makes you more difficult to
snuff out than others. You die from the dying condition
at dying 5, rather than dying 4. If you roll a success on a
save against a death or negative effect, you get a critical
success instead.

VITALITY SIPHON
HEALING

NECROMANCY

MAJOR GIFT
POSITIVE

Aspect life
Activate [reaction] envision; Trigger An ally within 60 feet regains
more Hit Points than it is currently down via a targeted
positive healing effect without a duration; Effect Your relic
acts as a relay for vitality. You or an adjacent willing creature
regain a number of Hit Points equal to the amount in excess
of the triggering creature’s maximum Hit Points; for instance,
if the triggering creature was missing 5 Hit Points and was
targeted by a heal spell that restored 12 Hit Points, you or
an adjacent willing creature would regain the remaining 7
Hit Points.

LIFE EVERLASTING
HEALING

NECROMANCY

GRAND GIFT

POSITIVE

Aspect life
Activate [two-actions] envision; Frequency once per day; Effect

MENTAL

Aspect mind
Your relic grants you a powerful
neural plasticity, and as a
result, you can learn languages
more easily. You learn an additional
language of your choice for every 2
levels of the relic (minimum 1). You can
retrain one of the languages from
the relic with only a single week
of downtime.

OVERFLOWING LIFE MINOR GIFT

18833910

18833910

NECROMANCY

Massive amounts of positive energy surge forth. For 1
minute, you emit positive energy in a 10-foot emanation
centered on you. At the end of your turn, you (if you are
living) and allied living creatures in the emanation regain 10
Hit Points. If you or an allied creature would die due to an
increased dying value, you can Dismiss the activation as a
free action to prevent the death; if you do, their dying value
doesn’t increase.

RECALCULATE
DIVINATION

MINOR GIFT

MENTAL

Aspect mind
Activate [reaction] envision; Trigger You fail an attack roll; Effect
Analysis of angles, probabilities, and myriad other
factors flows from your relic into your mind after you
miss an attack, preparing you for the next one. You gain
a +1 circumstance bonus to your next attack roll against
the target you missed, as long as it is made before the
beginning of your next turn.

REPOSITORY OF KNOWLEDGE
DIVINATION

4121856

MINOR GIFT

MENTAL

Aspect mind
Your relic is imbued with the psychic impressions of ages
past. While the relic is on your person, you are trained in 3
additional Lore skills of the GM’s choice that fit the relic’s
history, decided at the time of gaining this gift. If the relic is
9th level, you instead have expert proficiency in these Lore
skills, and if the relic is 17th level, you have master proficiency
in these Lore skills.

PERCEPTION FILTER
DIVINATION

MAJOR GIFT

MENTAL

Aspect mind
Activate [two-actions] envision; Frequency once per day; Effect Your
relic reaches into the minds of nearby creatures and
blocks your presence from their perceptions. For the
next 10 minutes, a creature that enters a 120-foot-radius
emanation, centered on you, must attempt a secret Will
save, after which the creature is then temporarily immune
for 1 day.

102

18833910

4121857

4121857

18833911

18833911


Tools

Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature takes a –2 status penalty to Perception
checks to Seek or otherwise detect you.
Failure You filter all of the creature’s senses, making it
difficult for it to notice you. When you are hidden or
undetected from the creature, it doesn’t observe you
as soon as you do anything other than Hide, Sneak, or
Step. If it rolls a Perception check to Seek or otherwise
detect you, it gets the outcome one degree of success
worse than what it rolled, and if you roll a Stealth
check to Hide, Sneak, or otherwise escape its
attention, you get the outcome one degree of
success better than what you rolled against the
creature. If you use a hostile action toward the
creature, the effect ends for that creature
after your hostile action is completed.
Critical Failure As failure, but the effect
doesn’t end for that creature if you use
a hostile action against it.

PSYCHIC SCREAM MAJOR GIFT
DIVINATION

GRAND GIFT

MENTAL

Aspect mind
Your relic takes over some of your mental
processes and enhances others. You gain
telepathy; if you already have telepathy,
you instead increase its range by 30
feet. Whenever you would become
stupefied, reduce the value by 1.
You are permanently quickened
and can use the additional action to
Recall Knowledge.

HEALING

NECROMANCY

MINOR GIFT

PLANT

Aspect plant
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Effect Pollen and poison
spores spray from your relic, dealing 1d6 poison damage
for every 2 relic levels (minimum 1d6) to all creatures in
a 15-foot cone (basic Fortitude save). On a critical failure,
targets are also dazzled for 1 round. You can’t use
Pollen Spray again for 1d4 rounds.

SPROUT ALLY

MINOR GIFT

PLANT

Aspect plant
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact;
Frequency once per day; Effect Your
relic rapidly matures and animates
nearby plant matter into an ally to fight by
you, casting summon plant or fungus, with a level of half
the item’s level rounded up. You can Sustain this Activation
as you would the spell.

PLANT

MINOR GIFT

Aspect plant
Your relic grows potent natural medicines. Each night,
two medicinal herbs (or other plants) grow from your relic
and can be harmlessly harvested during your next daily
preparations. A living creature that consumes an herb with
an Interact action regains 1d8 Hit Points for every 2 relic
levels (minimum 1d8). At 9th level, the relic grows three
herbs each night, and at 17th level, the relic grows four herbs
each night. Herbs wither away 1 day after being harvested.

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

MAJOR GIFT

Aspect plant
Activate [one-action] Interact; Effect Your relic launches a sticky,
multi‑stranded vine at a target within 50 feet. Make an
attack roll as you would when using a grappling hook,
but if you roll a critical failure on the check to secure the
vine, you get a failure instead. Once the vine is anchored,
creatures receive a +1 status bonus to Athletics checks to
Climb the vine, and they gain a +5-foot status bonus to the
distance they move with a successful check while
Climbing using the vine.
The vine lasts for 1 day or until you use
Grappling Vine again, at which point your
older vine withers.

PLANT

PLANT

introduction

TRANSMUTATION

PETAL DANCE

PLANT GIFTS
APOTHECARY’S GARDEN

EVOCATION

GRAPPLING VINE

MENTAL

Aspect mind
Activate [two-actions] envision; Effect Your thoughts build before
spilling forth in a powerful telepathic scream. Enemies
within a 20-foot-radius burst centered on you must
attempt a basic Will save or take 1d10 mental damage for
every 2 levels of the relic. On a critical failure, they are also
stupefied 1 for 1 minute.

MENTAL BASTION

POLLEN SPRAY

2

4121857

MAJOR GIFT

TRANSMUTATION

Aspect plant
Activate
[two-actions]
envision;
Frequency once per hour; Effect
You discorporate into a cloud of
petals and leaves. This grants you the
swarm trait, immunity to falling damage, resistance 5
to bludgeoning and slashing damage, and weakness
5 to area and splash damage. You can fit into spaces
only a few inches wide, moving your constituent petals
through the gap. You don’t gain the swarm mind ability,
so you are still affected normally by mental effects. As
a swarm, you can’t speak, cast spells, use manipulate
actions requiring your hands, activate your magic items,
or make any of your Strikes with your normal body. You
remain in this form for 1 minute or until you Dismiss the
activation. At 13th level, the relic gains a reaction that
triggers when you fall or take damage, applying this gift’s

103

18833911

4121858

4121858


Gamemastery Guide

resistances, weaknesses, and immunity to falling damage
to the triggering effect.

MEGAFLORA
CONJURATION

Aspect plant
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Frequency once per day;
Effect With a pulse of natural energy,
your relic grows massive plants
in an instant. The megaflora is
of one of the following types,
chosen by the GM when the
relic gains this gift. A megaflora
appears in an unoccupied 10-foot
space within 30 feet and has
50 Hit Points, weakness to
fire 5, 37 AC, +20 Reflex, and
+30 Fortitude. It persists for
1 minute or until reduced to 0
Hit Points.
• Corpseflower A single putridsmelling flower grows at the
target location. While the
flower persists, each round
at the end of your turn, all
creatures in a 20-foot burst centered on the plant
except you must succeed at a Fortitude save or be
sickened 2 (also stunned 2 on a critical failure). This is a
poison effect.
• Thorns A 10-foot-tall thorned plant or bamboo stalk
grows at the target location. While the stalk persists,
each round at the end of your turn, sharp stakes erupt
from the ground, dealing 6d8 piercing damage to all
creatures in a 20-foot burst centered on the plant
except you (basic Reflex)
• Tree of Life A large tree bearing life-giving fruit grows
at the target location. While the tree persists, living
creatures within reach of the tree can use an Interact
action to pick and eat one of the tree’s fruits, regaining
2d8+5 Hit Points; picking a fruit without eating it
causes the fruit to instantly vanish. This is a healing
effect, and a given creature can heal from the tree only
once per round.

18833912

18833912

GRAND GIFT

PLANT

SHADOW GIFTS
ENCOMPASSING DARKNESS

MINOR GIFT

CONJURATION SHADOW

Aspect shadow
The shadows at your feet can hold objects. You can Interact
with your shadow to store or remove objects, just like you
would a mundane container. Your shadow can contain 3
Bulk of objects, which don’t count toward the Bulk you are
carrying. At 6th level, and every 4 levels thereafter, you can
store 1 additional Bulk of objects in your shadow. While the
items are in your shadow and can be detected normally, you

gain a +4 circumstance bonus to Stealth checks to Conceal
the Objects unless someone knows to check your shadow
for items.

OBSCURE

MINOR GIFT

ILLUSION SHADOW

Aspect shadow
Your relic absorbs light and wraps shadow around you, hiding
you in darkness. As long as you are in dim
light in an area of shadows, you can attempt
a Stealth check to Hide, even if you aren’t
concealed against the creature, such as with
a creature with darkvision.

SHADOW SMITH

MINOR GIFT

CONJURATION SHADOW

Aspect shadow
Activate [one-action] Interact; Effect Your relic
pulls at nearby shadows, twisting
them into the shape of a simple
weapon or a simple tool or item, such as
a rope or crowbar. It lasts until it is used
for a single activity, until you use shadow
smith again, or for 1 minute, whichever comes first, after
which it dissipates.

DANCING SHADOW

MAJOR GIFT

4121858

SHADOW EVOCATION

Aspect shadow; Prerequisites The relic is a weapon.
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Frequency once per hour;
Effect Your relic’s shadow detaches from your relic and
dances through the air to attack an enemy. When you
Activate the relic, designate a target. The relic’s shadow
flies up to 60 feet until it is adjacent to that foe and
then makes a Strike against it, dealing 5d8 damage on a
success or double that on a critical success; the damage
type is of any type normally dealt by your relic. The
shadow uses your attack bonus with the relic, and it uses
and contributes to your multiple attack penalty. While this
activation is in effect, you can use a single action, which
has the attack and concentrate traits, to mentally direct
the shadow to make another Strike against the same
target. The shadow lasts until that target is reduced to
0 Hit Points, that target moves more than 400 feet from
you, or that target moves to an area where no shadow
could be cast, such as an area of complete darkness,
whichever comes first.
The shadow doesn’t take up space, grant flanking, or have
any other attributes a creature would, and it automatically
follows the chosen foe. The shadow can’t make any attack
other than its Strike, and feats or spells that affect weapons
do not apply to it.

DARK ROADS

MAJOR GIFT

CONJURATION SHADOW TELEPORTATION

Aspect shadow

104

18833912

4121859

4121859

18833913

18833913


Tools

Activate [two-actions] command, envision; Effect Your relic creates a
path from your shadow to a nearby one, teleporting you
and any items you’re wearing or holding from your current
space to an unoccupied one within 30 feet that you can
see. You can’t use the dark roads gift again for 1d4 rounds.
If the destination is not within an area of bright
light, the range is instead 60 feet. If this would bring
another creature with you—even if you’re carrying it
in an extradimensional container—the gift fails.

UMBRAL BODY

GRAND GIFT

SHADOW TRANSMUTATION

Aspect shadow
Activate [two-actions] command, Interact; Effect Shadowy essence
infuses your body, and you can reshape wisps of yourself
into a variety of damaging shadows. This has the effect
of a 6th-level shadow blast, choosing from only
bludgeoning, slashing, or piercing damage. You can’t
use this activation again for 1d4 rounds.

WATER GIFTS
LASHING CURRENTS

MINOR GIFT

EVOCATION WATER

Aspect water; Prerequisites The relic is a weapon.
Water collects at the tip of your relic. You can adjust your
grip on your relic with an Interact action to allow you to make
lashing current weapon Strikes with your relic, which deal 1d4
bludgeoning damage; have the disarm, finesse, reach 10, trip,
and versatile S traits; and are in the flail group. Your lashing
current Strikes gain the benefit of your relic’s fundamental
and property runes, though any property runes that would
not be applicable to the lashing currents are not applied. You
can use another Interact action to return to your normal grip
and make Strikes with the relic.

MONSOON CURTAIN
AIR

CONJURATION

MINOR GIFT

WATER

Aspect water
Activate [three-actions] command, envision;
Frequency once per day; Effect You
call down a curtain of violent rain in a
location within 120 feet. The wall is 5 feet
thick, 30 feet long, up to 30 feet high, and
lasts for 1 minute. The wall stands vertically,
but you can shape its path. The wall has the
following effects.
• If a fire effect crosses through the wall,
it either uses the outcome one degree of
success worse than the result of its attack
roll or its targets use the outcome one degree of
success better than the result of their saving throw, as
appropriate.
• Creatures with a weakness to water that cross the wall
or start their turn in the wall take damage equal to
their weakness.

• The wall imposes a –2 status penalty to Perception
checks to sense creatures or objects on the other side.

TIDAL CRASH

MINOR GIFT

EVOCATION WATER

Aspect water
Activate [two-actions] command, envision; Frequency once per day;
Effect Your relic spews forth a dense sphere of water.
Make a spell attack roll against a target within 30 feet.
On a success, you deal 2d10 bludgeoning damage plus
2 bludgeoning splash damage. At 3rd level and every 2
levels thereafter, increase the initial damage by 1d10 and
the splash damage by 1.

BOTTOMLESS RESERVOIR

MAJOR GIFT

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery

CONJURATION EXTRADIMENSIONAL WATER

Aspect water
Activate [one-action] Interact; Effect Your relic can absorb and
release water, storing it in a endless reservoir. You either
touch your relic to an adjacent body of water and absorb
1 gallon of it into the reservoir, or you release 1 gallon of a
liquid from the reservoir. You can add another action to the
activation to absorb water from a touched creature made
entirely of water, like a water elemental. If you do, it takes
1d6 damage per relic level (basic Fortitude save).
Activate [reaction] Interact; Trigger You are targeted by an acid
or water effect; Effect Your relic attempts to counteract
the effect, expending 1 gallon of stored liquid. At the GM’s
discretion, you can use this ability on effects made of other
liquids, such as blood.

FLOWING FOOTSTEPS

GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121859

MAJOR GIFT

TRANSMUTATION WATER

Aspect water
Your relic ensures no water impedes your movement. You gain
the effects of the water walk spell, and the ability to breathe
water. You also gain a swim Speed equal to your Speed or 15
feet, whichever is higher.

RIPPLES AND WAVES

GRAND GIFT

WATER

Aspect water
You become attuned to the ebb and
flow of all things. You gain wavesense
60 as a precise sense and can cast
5th-level hydraulic push at will as an
innate spell.
Activate [two-actions] command, envision;
Frequency once per day; Effect Ankle-deep
water floods outward from you, filling a
60-foot emanation centered on you for 1 minute. Enemies
within the area without a swim Speed treat the area as
difficult terrain for movement on land. While the effect
persists, you can have any water effects you generate
originate from any point within the emanation, in addition
to their normal range and area.

105

18833913

4121860

4121860


Gamemastery Guide

ARTIFACTS

A globe of utter darkness that consumes all things. Powerful weapons created in antiquity
carrying the hopes of an entire people. A simple deck of cards representing fortunes both
transcendent and deadly. These are artifacts—items of incredible power, spoken of in
thousands of stories and beyond the capability of modern people to create.
Stranger and more powerful than other magic items,
artifacts can change the course of history in the right
hands—or the wrong hands. Simply finding an artifact
is a pivotal moment in your campaign, and its presence
then ripples throughout your entire game, warping the
story around it. Some entire adventures revolve around
one artifact!
Adding an artifact to your game should never be taken
lightly. Artifacts shouldn’t be found in normal treasure
hoards, even at 20th level, and you’ll need to structure
moments in your plot that play into the artifact’s presence.
Prepare yourself for encounters being easily overcome
by the artifact. That doesn’t mean you shouldn’t include
such encounters, since part of the thrill of an artifact
is that it breaks the normal rules! Though you should
include an artifact mindfully, you should allow it to have
its full impact so that it can do itself and the story of your
game justice.

ARTIFACT RULES

18833914

18833914

Every artifact is an item with the artifact trait. This trait
means two things: the item can’t be crafted by normal
means, and it can’t be damaged by normal means.
Artifacts are always rare or unique. The ones found here
are all 20th level or higher, which is typical for artifacts.
The other rules for wearing or using the item still apply.

ARTIFACT DESTRUCTION
An artifact’s stat block usually has a destruction entry.
This details the extraordinary method needed to destroy
the item. These entries can be highly specific. It could take
completing an entire quest, or even an entire campaign,
to finally destroy an artifact. However, the story of your
game might require something different, so you can
always change an artifact’s destruction requirement for
your game.

CREATING AN ARTIFACT

Mechanically, an artifact functions in the game just like
any other item—only the scope of its abilities is different.
Artifacts can and should do things normal items can’t,
so you don’t need to apply the normal limitations on
creating items.
When you’re making an artifact, start by defining its
role in the story. Is it meant to be a powerful weapon
against the forces of darkness? A mercurial force
injecting random chance? A terrible danger that needs to
be destroyed? The artifact’s role in the story affects the

features you give it. Come up with some story beats that
make sense for the item, then create abilities that enable
those moments. An artifact can have more abilities than a
typical item—just make sure they all fit its theme.
Give your item the artifact trait and either the rare trait
(if there multiple items of its kind), or the unique trait (if
only one exists). Other traits work like they do for any
other item. An artifact is usually 20th level or higher, but
its specific level is up to you. Imagine who created it and
what their level likely was.
Though you can disregard most of the normal
limitations on items, be careful not to create an artifact
that will undermine your story. If your item’s abilities are
so useful or strong that the best option in any battle is
to always use the artifact to annihilate the opposition, the
artifact has taken over your story instead of serving it. A
5th-level character with access to 10th-level spells through
an artifact can lead to incredible stories, but if the DC is so
high that enemies are guaranteed to critically fail against
those spells except on a natural 20, the item will probably
distort play more than you intended. To avoid this, you
might set the item’s DCs, attack bonuses, and the spell levels
of its offensive abilities significantly lower than they would
be for an item of its level, especially if they can be used at
will. You could also create artifacts that use the wielder’s
spell DC instead of having their own DC, to make them
more broadly usable at a wider range of levels. In addition,
an artifact’s abilities should be somewhat narrow in their
application; aim to make your artifacts very powerful in
certain situations, rather than having broadly applicable
abilities. For instance, the orbs of dragonkind each work
against only a certain kind of dragon, which makes them
hugely powerful when facing that one creature, but not
against every foe the PCs run across.

4121860

ARTIFACTS

Countless artifacts have been created over the ages, only
a few of which are described here.

AXE OF THE DWARVEN LORDS
UNIQUE

ARTIFACT

CONJURATION

MAGICAL

ITEM 26
TRANSMUTATION

Usage held in 2 hands; Bulk 3
The blade of this +4 major striking keen returning speed
dwarven waraxe is carved with an intricate design depicting
countless generations of great dwarven warriors and leaders.
The axe has the thrown 30 feet weapon trait, in addition to
the normal weapon traits for a dwarven waraxe. Strikes with
the axe deal an additional 1d6 damage to orcs. While the axe

106

18833914

4121861

4121861

18833915

18833915


Tools

is in your possession, you gain a +4 item bonus when Crafting
armor, jewelry, metalworking, stonemasonry, snares, traps,
and weapons. If you are a dwarf, you gain greater darkvision
(Core Rulebook 465) while holding the axe. If you are not a
dwarf, you are stupefied 4 while holding the
axe, and if you are an orc, you are also drained
4 and enfeebled 4 while holding it.
Activate [three-actions] envision, Interact; Frequency
once per week; Effect The axe casts a
10th‑level summon elemental spell to
conjure an elite elemental avalanche
(Bestiary 6, 147). The spell is automatically
sustained, requiring no action on your part but
still allowing you to command the elemental on each of
your turns. You can Dismiss the Spell.
Destruction If an orc beheads a dwarven king with the Axe of
the Dwarven Lords, the axe rusts away to nothing.

DECK OF MANY THINGS
RARE

ARTIFACT

MAGICAL

ITEM 22

TRANSMUTATION

Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk —
These 22 cards of heavy vellum, usually stored in a box or a
pouch, bear images or glyphs depicting symbols of magical
power. Looking at a card without activating it shows the card face
but has no magical effect. Once the deck is face down, the cards
randomize themselves—if you look at the top card multiple
times, you may find it changes. Any card removed from the
deck goes missing after a few seconds, reappearing in the
deck. Advice on randomly selecting cards appears on page 108.
Activate [one-action] envision, Interact; Effect You declare how many
cards you will draw facedown from the deck, then draw your
first card. The card takes effect immediately. Any further cards
must be drawn within the next hour, and any card
you don’t voluntarily draw flits off the deck and
affects you anyway. You can never activate
the same deck of many things again.
Once a card is drawn, it produces its
effect immediately and then disappears
back into the deck, which immediately
shuffles itself. (The Dullard and
Jester are exceptions, as described
in their entries below.)
The effects of each card are
as follows.
• Balance Your alignment
changes to a radically
different one. If you fail to
adhere to that alignment, you lose a
level and all the benefits you gained at that
level. Your XP total doesn’t change when you lose a
level this way.
• Comet If you alone defeat the next low-threat or harder
hostile enemy or enemies you encounter, you gain enough
XP to reach the next level. Otherwise, you gain no benefit.
• Donjon You’re imprisoned by a 10th-level imprisonment
ritual. This uses the prison option, typically sequestering

you in a distant part of the world. You also lose all your
items. Cease drawing cards.
• Dullard Immediately reduce your Intelligence score by
1d4+1. You can then draw an additional card, and the
Dullard card then disappears forever.
• Euryale (curse) A medusa’s image curses you
with a permanent –1 status penalty to all
saving throws. This can be removed by only
a deity or the Fates card.
• The Fates The Fates respin the fabric of
reality to save you from any situation you
choose. This can reverse even a past event,
and you can make the decision instantly even
if the event would slay you. This intervention
saves only you, not anyone else affected by
the event. There’s no limit on how long you
can wait before using this effect.
• Flames A fiend becomes filled with anger, jealousy, envy,
or some other reason to despise you. Its hatred for you
doesn’t cease until either it or you is dead. It attacks you
or otherwise attempts to foil you within 1d20 days. The
GM determines the specifics of the fiend.
• Fool You lose 1d10×100 XP unless you choose to draw
two more cards.
• Gem Gain your choice of 25 pieces of jewelry worth 200
gp each or 50 gems worth 100 gp each.
• Jester You can either draw two more cards or gain
1d10×100 XP. The card then disappears forever.
• Key Gain a magic weapon of 12th level or higher. The GM
determines the item and what runes it has, if any.
• Knight A palace guard (page 206) arrives and swears
unfailing loyalty to you.
• Moon Roll 1d4 to determine how many wishes the card
grants you, which also affects the phase of the
moon depicted on the card (1: crescent moon;
2: half moon; 3: gibbous moon; 4: full moon).
These wishes each take one action to speak
and have the effect of a wish spell.
• Rogue One NPC ally becomes filled
with hatred and immediately turns
against you forever. The NPC
might keep this hatred secret until
an opportune moment.
• Ruin You lose all your nonmagical possessions, including
any wealth and property.
• Skull You must immediately battle a lesser death
(Bestiary 197). If slain in the battle, you can never be
revived, except by a deity.
• Star Gain an ability boost you must use immediately on
one ability score of your choice.
• Sun Gain 1,000 XP and a beneficial permanent magic
item of 6th to 11th level, chosen by the GM.
• Talons All your magic items disappear permanently, except
for the deck and any artifact of higher level than the deck.
• Throne You gain a permanent +4 status bonus to

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121861

107

18833915

4121862

4121862


Gamemastery Guide

CARD SUBSTITUTIONS
You can use playing cards or tarot cards as proxies for the
cards in a deck of many things.

Card
Balance
Comet
Donjon
Dullard
Euryale
The Fates
Flames
Fool
Gem
Jester
Key
Knight
Moon
Rogue
Ruin
Skull
Star
Sun
Talons
Throne
Vizier
The Void

Playing Card
2 of spades
2 of diamonds
Ace of spades
2 of clubs
Queen of spades
Ace of hearts
Queen of clubs
Joker (black)
2 of hearts
Joker (red)
Queen of hearts
Jack of hearts
Queen of diamonds
Jack of spades
King of spades
Jack of clubs
Jack of diamonds
King of diamonds
Ace of clubs
King of hearts
Ace of diamonds
King of clubs

Tarot Card
XI. Justice
2 of swords
4 of swords
2 of pentacles
10 of swords
3 of cups
XV. The Devil
0. The Fool
7 of cups
XII. The Hanged Man
V. The Hierophant
Page of swords
XVIII. The Moon
5 of swords
XVI. The Tower
XIII. Death
XVII. The Star
XIX. The Sun
Queen of pentacles
4 of wands
IX. The Hermit
8 of swords

18833916

18833916

Diplomacy checks, and you now own a small castle in
any open area you wish. You must choose its location
within 1 hour.
• Vizier Upon request, you can learn the solution to any
one problem or the correct answer to any one question,
unless that information is obscured by a deity. This doesn’t
necessarily give you the means to act on that solution. You
have 1 year to take the vizier’s advice or lose its benefits.
• The Void Your mind becomes trapped forever. This card
is fickle, but it often throws the psyche into a prison in
an object on a distant plane or planet. Wish or similarly
powerful magic can reveal your psyche’s location, but it
doesn’t bring you back. Your comatose body continues to
function. Cease drawing cards.
Destruction Trick the Grim Reaper into drawing the Skull card.

ELDER SIGN
RARE

ABJURATION

ITEM 25
ARTIFACT

OCCULT

Usage held in one hand; Bulk 1
This stone tablet is carved with the symbol of a five-branched
twig. There are only a limited number of elder signs, and each
time one is destroyed, the universe’s doom creeps inexorably
closer. Reciting one of three different occult mantras (DC 20
Occultism check to do so correctly) allows three different
activations. All three abilities work only on a creature connected
to the Elder Mythos or a cosmic horror, such as a wendigo or
gug; the activations refer to them as “eldritch creatures.”
Activate [two-actions] command, envision, Interact; Effect The elder

sign casts a 10th-level banishment spell on an eldritch
creature. Even if the creature isn’t extraplanar, the elder
sign can still banish it, sending it back to the part of the
Material Plane from which it originated. If the creature is a
Great Old One, the elder sign banishes it automatically (as
if it critically failed its save) but is then forever destroyed.
Activate [two-actions] command, envision, Interact; Effect The elder sign
casts dispel magic on an effect from an eldritch creature,
using a counteract level of 10 and +30 modifier for the roll.
Activate [two-actions] command, envision, Interact; Effect The elder sign
casts dimensional lock, though it wards against travel by only
eldritch creatures. Each time the elder sign casts dimensional
lock in this way, the previous dimensional lock spell ends.
Destruction The only way to destroy an elder sign is to use it
to banish a Great Old One.

ESSENCE PRISM
UNIQUE

ARTIFACT

ITEM 28

TRANSMUTATION

Bulk 5
This enormous, multifaceted prism normally rests on a
pedestal, eerily refracting many-colored lights even when no
light source is present. In reality, the prism refracts the four
magical essences into the visible spectrum (see page 300 in
the Core Rulebook for more on the four essences). A creature
adjacent to the prism can adjust its facets with an Interact
action to change between two polarities. Two essences flow
from two input streams into the prism, where the prism
combines them into a single output stream; alternatively, a
single essence flows from one input stream into the prism and
is split into two output streams. A creature that enters and
stays within an input essence stream for 1 minute is slowly
encased in solid magic, at which point it is paralyzed until
anyone reverses the prism’s flow or finishes activating the
prism. A creature stepping into an output essence stream is
gently pushed back and out of the stream.
Activate [two-actions] Interact; Requirements The prism has only one
input stream; Effect You alter and rearrange the facets of the
essence prism, adjusting the essences to select for a single
quality, which might be associated with mental essence, like
a personality trait; material essence, like a physical quality;
vital essence, like a belief or instinct; or spiritual essence, like
an alignment component such as good or lawful. You must
succeed at a secret DC 30 skill check with a skill associated
with a magical tradition that uses the essence you chose (for
instance, Arcana or Occultism for mental essence, as arcane
and occult magic both use mental essence). On a failure, you
accidentally set the prism for some other quality.
Activate 1 minute (Interact); Requirements The prism has only
one input stream, and a creature is encased in magic in
the input stream; Effect Over the course of the next hour,
the creature in the input stream has its essences refracted
through the prism, creating two cocoons of magic in the
output streams that each contain a new creature. At the end
of the process, the original creature is gone, and the two
new creatures break free of their cocoons. Each creature is
part of the original, separated from the rest based on the

4121862

108

18833916

4121863

4121863

18833917

18833917


Tools

last quality set by the prism’s first activation. For instance,
if you set the prism to “good,” one creature would have all
the original creature’s good aspects and the other would
be the original creature’s evil side. Unless you selected a
physical quality, both new creatures look just like the
original. The new creatures are usually 2 levels lower
than the original, but if the original creature was strongly
biased with respect to the quality you chose (for instance,
if splitting out the good and evil side of a redeemer), the
stronger creature is 1 level lower and the weaker creature is
3 or more levels lower. If calibrated correctly, this activation
can also reverse the effect of the third activation.
Activate 1 minute (Interact); Requirements The prism has two
input streams, and a
creature is encased
in magic in each of the input
streams; Effect Over the course of
the next hour, the essences of both
creatures in the input streams are
refracted through the prism, creating a
cocoon of magic in the output stream
that contains a new creature. At the
end of the process, the original
creatures are gone, and the new
creature breaks free of its cocoon.
The new creature is an amalgam of
the originals, with a new personality
blended from both, and is usually
1 or 2 levels higher than the higher level of the
original creatures unless the lower-level creature
was much weaker. This activation also reverses the
effect of the second activation.
Destruction Forcing the essence prism to combine two
incompatible demigods destroys the prism, though it might
also result in a new divinity.

FORGEFATHER’S SEAL
RARE

ABJURATION

ARTIFACT

ITEM 24
DIVINE

Usage etched onto armor
This rune was created by Torag, god of the forge, protection,
and strategy, and shared with his greatest artisans and
warriors. Torag designed a small number of these seals as gifts
to allied good deities; each one is nearly identical but has a
different spell effect when using the reaction activation; for
instance, Sarenrae’s seal casts sunburst instead of earthquake.
A seal constantly rings with the quiet sound of a hammer
striking an anvil when etched onto a runestone. A Forgefather’s
seal can be etched only onto armor that can bear two or more
property runes, and it is so powerful that it takes the place
of two property runes. While wearing armor etched with a
Forgefather’s seal, you gain fire resistance 40. You ignore
the armor’s check penalty and Speed penalty (if any); if the
armor is light or medium, increase its item bonus to AC by 1.
In addition, any shield you wield automatically recovers 10 Hit
Points at the start of your turn each round.
Activate [reaction] Interact; Frequency once per hour; Trigger You

are hit by an attack; Effect The Forgefather’s seal glows
and your armor shakes as it absorbs the blow. The attack’s
damage is reduced by 100 and you cast earthquake
(DC 40), centered directly on the triggering creature. You
decide the area of the earthquake when you Cast the
Spell, from as small as the size of the creature and up to
a 60‑foot burst.
Activate [three-actions] Interact; Frequency once per day; Effect You
call upon on the restorative powers of the seal to repair
an item within reach. The rune instantly restores the item
to full Hit Points, even if the item was destroyed, using
the effects of the remake spell, so long as the majority of
the item is available for
the repair. The seal can
restore even magic items and
artifacts of its level or lower. Once
you have used this ability, the seal’s
ability to automatically repair shields
becomes inactive until the next time
you make your daily preparations.
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger You
have not acted yet on your turn;
Effect You call upon Torag to
defend your allies and those
around you, sacrificing yourself
in the process. Creatures of
your choosing within 60 feet
recover all their Hit Points. If any
of the creatures are dead, they are
instead brought back to life with half of their
maximum Hit Points. The chosen creatures also
gain a +4 status bonus to AC and saving throws,
and fast healing 15 for 1 hour. You can use this ability
to bring back to life a creature that requires a miracle
spell or divine intervention to raise from the dead, as long
as you choose no other creatures within 60 feet to recover.
Once you use this activation, you are turned into a perfect
statue made from stone or metal that depicts you in a
glorious pose honoring your sacrifice, and you can never be
restored. The Forgefather’s seal remains on this statue and
can be transferred to another suit of armor or a runestone
as normal.
Destruction Using the Forgefather’s seal ability to bring the
dead back to life on an evil demigod causes it to shatter in a
violent explosion that destroys the seal and the statue made
as part of the sacrifice, erasing all knowledge of the user from
existence. It does, however, bring the evil demigod back to life.

HORNS OF NARAGA
UNIQUE

ARTIFACT

INVESTED

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121863

ITEM 26
MAGICAL

NECROMANCY

Usage worn headwear; Bulk 2
This imposing helm bears the horns of a powerful black
dragon. While wearing the Horns of Naraga, you gain greater
darkvision and immunity to acid. If you are undead, you gain
resistance 40 to positive damage. If you are not undead, the
helm quickly saps the life from you, dealing 10d6 negative

109

18833917

4121864

4121864


Gamemastery Guide

damage to you every round. If you die from this damage, you
rise as an undead of an equal level in 1d4 rounds.
Activate [free-action] envision; Trigger You touch a creature as part
of an unarmed attack or melee spell attack roll; Effect The
creature takes 5d6 negative damage. If you are an undead,
you regain Hit Points equal to the negative damage the
creature took.
Activate [three-actions] command; Frequency once per day; Effect
The Horns of Naraga transform into Naraga, an ancient
black dragon (Bestiary 106). Naraga appears in an adjacent
appropriate space, and if no such space is available, she
does not appear. Naraga follows your commands without
question. She remains for up to 1 hour or until you use an
Interact action to dismiss her, after which she reverts
back to the helm. If Naraga is slain, she immediately
reverts back to the helm and can’t be summoned
for 1 week. You don’t receive any of the helm’s
other benefits while it is transformed.
Destruction The helm is utterly obliterated if
crushed between the jaws of an ancient black
dragon’s skull located in a desert while the sun
is at its zenith.

MIRROR OF SORSHEN
UNIQUE

ENCHANTMENT

ITEM 25
MAGICAL

Usage bonded (see below); Bulk L
The silvery glass of this oval mirror displays
alluring sights. Its dark wooden frame is
studded with small green gems and is carved
with the shapes of a male figure on one edge of
the glass and a female figure on the other side.
The mirror can form a bond with a spellcaster who
has legendary proficiency in Arcana or Occultism, who
becomes the mirror’s owner. Regardless of where the
mirror is, as long as the bond remains, the owner is
aware of everything the mirror is currently reflecting
and can use the mirror’s activations.
Whenever an intelligent creature looks in the
mirror, they see an image of a person, creature,
or item they find irresistible—most often one they
find attractive. The specific image varies depending on the
observer, even when more than one creature is looking into
the mirror at the same time. Observers are fascinated by
the images in the mirror unless they succeed at a DC 35
Will save each round. On a failure, they stare blankly at
the mirror for as long as it remains in view, and if it leaves
their view, they stare toward the last place they saw the
mirror for several minutes thereafter. This is an emotion,
enchantment, incapacitation, and visual effect. Creatures
that are fascinated by the mirror are so deeply entranced
that they don’t end their fascinated condition automatically
even if a creature uses hostile actions against them or their
allies; instead, they can attempt a DC 30 Will save to end the
fascination. At the GM’s discretion, a truly innocent creature
or a creature that has renounced all worldly pleasures might
be immune to the mirror’s fascination.

18833918

18833918

ARTIFACT

Activate [two-actions] envision (emotion, enchantment, incapacitation,
visual); Effect You force a creature looking at the mirror
to attempt an additional Will save against the mirror’s
fascination effect, even if they succeeded at their save.
Activate [three-actions] command (emotion, enchantment,
incapacitation); Requirements The target must be
fascinated by the mirror; Effect You control the target for
30 days, with the effect of a critically failed saving throw
against dominate. If the victim sees the mirror again at any
point before this duration expires, the control extends for
an additional 30 days from the moment it looked at the
mirror again. While there is no initial saving throw, the
DC to break free due to commands against the creature’s
nature is 35.
Destruction The Mirror of Sorshen shatters into a thousand
pieces if an intelligent but completely innocent creature
resists the mirror’s attraction and then accidentally
drops it.

ORB OF DRAGONKIND
UNIQUE

ARCANE

ARTIFACT

ITEM 25
ENCHANTMENT

Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
Each of the legendary orbs of dragonkind
contains the essence and personality of a
powerful dragon, with each of the 10 most
famous orbs preserving a different type
of metallic or chromatic dragon’s spirit. It
is believed that orbs for other types of true
dragons exist, though that theory is yet to
be confirmed.
While holding an orb of dragonkind, you are
immune to the breath weapon of the dragon variety
associated with the orb. An orb of dragonkind also grants
a number of additional senses. You can communicate
verbally and visually with the bearers of other orbs as
if you were in the same room with them. You know if
there are any dragons within 10 miles of you at all
times; this extends to 100 miles for dragons of
the type associated with the orb. If an associated
dragon is within 1 mile, you know which direction the
dragon is from you and the dragon’s age, such as young, adult,
or ancient. Each orb grants a 10th-level arcane innate spell
that you can cast at will, determined by the specific orb.
The Orb of Gold Dragonkind can convey the innate spells of
any of the other orbs, as well as their activated abilities, but it
can grant each individual power only once per day. In addition,
the bearer of the gold orb can use its 3-action activation to
attempt to cast dominate on the bearer of another orb if
they are within 1 mile, as if that bearer were a dragon of the
associated type within 500 feet. The last reports of the Orb
of Gold Dragonkind on Golarion indicate the orb has been
destroyed, however. GMs running campaigns in settings other
than the Age of Lost Omens might decide the gold orb is still
intact for their campaigns.
Bearing an orb of dragonkind earns you the enmity
of all dragonkind forever because you profited from the

4121864

110

18833918

4121865

4121865

18833919

18833919


Tools

enslavement of the dragon within the orb, even if you later
lose the orb.
Spell Granted (DC 40) black dragon (darkness), blue dragon
(hallucinatory terrain), brass dragon
(speak with animals), bronze
dragon (control water), copper
dragon (hideous laughter), green
dragon (entangle), red dragon (wall
of fire), silver dragon (detect
alignment [evil only]), white
dragon (wall of ice)
Activate [three-actions] command; Frequency
once per round; Effect You cast a
10th-level dominate spell (DC 40)
on a dragon of the type associated
with the orb within 500 feet, except
the effect lasts for 1 month rather
than unlimited. The dragon does not
receive its status bonus to saving
throws against magic. The dragon is
then temporarily immune to further
domination via the orb for 24 hours.
Activate [two-actions] envision, Interact;
Frequency three times per day; Effect
You breathe an elemental blast that deals 25d6 damage (DC
40 basic Reflex save) in either a 60-foot cone or a 100-foot
line (your choice). The breath’s damage type matches the
Breath Weapon of the dragon type associated with the orb
of dragonkind (acid for the black orb, electricity for the blue
orb, and so on).
Destruction An orb of dragonkind violently shatters and
explodes when exposed to the Breath Weapon of a dragon
who is a descendant of the dragon trapped within. The
explosion deals damage as the 2-action activation above to all
creatures within 90 feet.

PHILOSOPHER’S EXTRACTOR
RARE

ARTIFACT

EVOCATION

MAGICAL

ITEM 28
TRANSMUTATION

Bulk 8
This bizarre machine is a complex arrangement of flasks, tubes,
and other alchemical equipment. The philosopher’s extractor
is designed to create the ultimate alchemical concoctions.
The extractor functions as an exceptional set of alchemist’s
tools, granting a +4 item bonus to Crafting checks related to
alchemy. When using the extractor to Craft an alchemical item
or with infused reagents as part of your daily preparations,
you can create impeccable alchemical items. An impeccable
alchemical item always uses the maximum numerical value
possible for any rolls it requires, such as dealing maximum
damage with alchemist’s fire or restoring the maximum
number of Hit Points with an elixir of life. If the impeccable
item has a duration, it lasts twice as long as normal. Finally, an
impeccable alchemical item never has a drawback.
Activate [three-actions] Interact; Frequency once per minute; Effect
You use the extractor to produce an alchemical item of
your level or lower whose formula you know. The extractor

can create 56 levels’ worth of items per day in this way.
For example, the extractor could create two true elixirs of
life (19th level) and two moderate elixirs of life (9th level),
or eight comprehension elixirs (7th level), and
so on.
Activate 1 hour (Interact); Effect You
take a sizable portion of a creature (at
least two-thirds of its original mass)
and filter it through the mechanisms
of the extractor. After the end of the
process, the philosopher’s extractor
creates a transmogrifying mutagen that
imparts the essence of the creature to the
drinker. The extractor can make several
transmogrifying mutagens simultaneously
using the same activation if enough mass is
provided at once, up to a maximum of 10
concurrent mutagens. Drinking a
transmogrifying mutagen imparts
you with one of the creature’s
unique abilities for 1 hour. This
could grant one of several abilities
such as a dragon’s Breath Weapon,
darkvision, flight, frightful presence,
or immunity to sleep. The ability functions as it did for
the original creature, except it uses your class DC or your
spell DC (whichever is higher) instead of the creature’s DC.
The mutagen grants only abilities based on a creature’s
physiology and never grants magic‑related abilities such
as innate spells or spellcasting ability. The GM ultimately
decides what ability a transmogrifying mutagen grants.
Unlike normal for mutagens and polymorph effects,
you can drink multiple transmogrifying mutagens and
gain benefits from each. When you drink transmogrifying
mutagens made from different creatures, you receive
abilities from each creature. When you drink multiple
transmogrifying mutagens made from the same type of
creature, such as multiple mutagens made from trolls,
you gain an additional ability for each transmogrifying
mutagen you drink, and the duration of the abilities from
that creature type increases by 1 hour for each additional
concoction you drink.
However, these additional benefits come with a risk; if
you drink a transmogrifying mutagen while at least one
other is active, after drinking it, you must succeed at a
flat check with a DC equal to the total number of active
transmogrifying mutagens you’ve consumed. On a failure,
you fully transform into a member of the species of the
latest transmogrifying mutagen you drank, and you almost
always go berserk from your change. The transformation
may leave some amount of your personality and memories
intact, at the GM’s discretion.
Destruction Simultaneously feeding the philosopher’s
extractor sizable portions of an aeon, angel, archon, azata,
daemon, demon, devil, protean, and psychopomp, each of at
least 14th level, along with a philosopher’s stone causes the

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121865

111

18833919

4121866

4121866


Gamemastery Guide

device to jam, overheat, and explode. Creatures within 60
feet of the explosion must succeed at a DC 55 Reflex save
or become covered in an alchemical slurry that transforms
them into a horrifying amalgam of at least two of the
creatures used to destroy the machine.

SERITHTIAL
UNIQUE

ITEM 23
ABJURATION

ARTIFACT

DIVINE

INTELLIGENT

Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk 1
Perception +28; normal vision and hearing within 60 feet
Communication empathy (partner only)
Skills Iomedae Lore +29, Religion +26, Zon-Kuthon Lore +29
Int +2, Wis +1, Cha +2
Will +30
The legendary blade Serithtial is said to have been forged
by Iomedae, goddess of honor, justice, and valor. She is an
intelligent +4 major striking holy bastard sword. Although
the sword is made of steel, Serithtial is also treated as cold
iron and silver (Core Rulebook 578), allowing her to deal
more damage to certain supernatural creatures.
She glows as bright as a torch, but you or Serithtial
can suppress or resume this glow as a single action,
which has the concentrate trait. In addition, Strikes with
Serithtial deal an additional 2d6 damage against creatures
that are worshippers of Zon-Kuthon, and while wielding
Serithtial, you constantly benefit from death ward and
freedom of movement spells that function only against
effects created by followers of Zon-Kuthon.
Serithtial was forged as a bastard sword, and she
reverts to this shape when no one wields her, but she
can also detect what sort of blade her current wielder
prefers and transform into it (choosing from dagger,
shortsword, longsword, scimitar, falchion, greatsword,
rapier, or bastard sword) using an action, which she
does when first held. The wielder can empathically tell
Serithtial to transform at any time by using a single
action, which has the concentrate
trait, after which Serithtial uses an
action to transform.
Serithtial is willing to work with a
partner of almost any alignment as long as they
are dedicated to defeating the great wyrm Kazavon and the
forces of Zon‑Kuthon. If you ignore those threats and pursue
your own agenda instead, before long Serithtial attempts to
seize control of your body (DC 45 Will save to resist her
control), though she typically remains in control for only
long enough to find a more worthy partner. You can attempt
a new Will save each day to retake control of your body.
Activate envision; Frequency once per hour; Effect Serithtial
spends the appropriate number of actions and casts a 9th
level heal or zone of truth spell (DC 45 for either of the
two spells).
Destruction If Kazavon or a great wyrm shadow dragon who
is a worshipper of Zon-Kuthon uses its breath weapon on
Serithtial while she is unattended, the sword melts into a pool
of mundane iron.

18833920

18833920

LG

SHOT OF THE FIRST VAULT
RARE

ARTIFACT

DIVINE

ITEM 23

EVOCATION

Ammunition any
Legends claim that some long-forgotten god stole the original
bundle of shots of the First Vault from Abadar’s repository.
Since then, individual pieces have turned up throughout
the multiverse. When you pick up a shot of the First Vault,
it immediately reshapes itself to function with any ranged
weapon and establishes you as its owner until another
creature picks it up. As its owner, you can use the shot’s
single-action activation after shooting it.
Instead of rolling weapon damage dice, a shot of the
First Vault deals 25 damage plus any bonuses or additional
damage as if 25 were the result of the weapon’s damage
dice; the damage type matches that normally dealt by
the weapon. Upon damaging a creature, the shot of the
First Vault shatters, and the fragments ricochet to hit
any other enemies within 30 feet, making attack rolls
with the same attack bonus. The shattered fragments
remain lodged in the creatures they damage;
the creatures are clumsy 2 while the fragments
remain in place. A total of 3 actions, which
have the manipulate trait, are required to remove
the fragments from yourself or an adjacent creature;
alternatively, a single action and a successful DC 30
Medicine check can be used. A critical failure on this
Medicine check deals 10 persistent bleed damage to the
creature with the embedded fragment.
Activate [one-action] command; Effect You recall the shot of the
First Vault, which automatically reloads itself into your
weapon. If the shot had fragmented, the fragments
violently dislodge themselves, dealing 15 persistent bleed
damage to each creature in which they were embedded.
The fragments then unite to re-form the shot of the First
Vault, which automatically reloads itself into your weapon.
Activate [three-actions] Interact; Requirements The shot is loaded in
your ranged weapon, or at hand if your ranged weapon has
a reload of 0; Effect You line up a perfectly aimed attack
directly toward the First Vault. You Strike a creature, then
the shot of the First Vault attempts to bring your target with
it as it returns to the First Vault. Unless your attack roll is
a critical failure, the creature must attempt a DC 45 Reflex
save; this effect has the incapacitation trait. Regardless, the
shot of the First Vault returns to the First Vault.
Critical Success The creature is unaffected.
Success The creature is moved 1d20×50 feet in the direction
you fired. If this causes it to hit a solid object, it takes 50
bludgeoning damage.
Failure The creature is transported to a random location on
the plane of Axis.
Critical Failure The creature is transported to the First Vault.
Unless it is capable of eluding Abadar’s precautions, it is
likely unable to escape the Vault on its own.
Destruction If 10 shots of the First Vault are all fired at the
same group of keketar or izfiitar proteans within 1 minute
of each other, each shot was a hit, and the shots are then

4121866

112

18833920

4121867

4121867


Tools

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18833921

18833921

4121867

recalled, the shots collide as they attempt to re-form and
crumble to dust.

SPHERE OF ANNIHILATION
RARE

ARTIFACT

MAGICAL

ITEM 27

TRANSMUTATION

Bulk —
A sphere of annihilation is a floating black sphere that
pulls any matter that comes into contact with it into a
void, destroying it utterly. Anything or anyone destroyed
by the sphere can be brought back only by a deity’s direct
intervention. The sphere can’t be counteracted by dispel
magic or similar effects.
The sphere stays entirely still until caused to move by a
creature controlling it. Taking control of the sphere requires
succeeding at an attempt to activate it. A talisman of the
sphere (see below) makes it easier to control the sphere.
Activate [one-action] command; Requirements You are within 40 feet of
the sphere; Effect You attempt a DC 30 Arcana or Occultism
check to take control of the sphere. If someone else already
controls the sphere, this check uses their Will DC if higher. If
you succeed, you take control of the sphere. If you fail, the
sphere moves 10 feet closer to you (or 20 feet on a critical
failure). You keep control as long as you remain within 80 feet
of the sphere and Sustain the Activation each round.
When you Sustain the Activation, you must attempt a
DC 30 Arcana or Occultism check. If you succeed, you direct
the sphere to move up to 10 feet in a straight line (or up to 20

feet on a critical success). On a failure, you lose control of the
sphere, and it moves 10 feet closer to you in a straight line (or
20 feet on a critical failure).
Destruction When a gate spell is cast such that its rift overlaps
a sphere of annihilation, roll d%. On a result of 1–50, the sphere
is destroyed; on a 51–85, the spell is disrupted; and on a 86–100,
everything within an 180-foot emanation of the sphere is pulled
to another plane through a tear in the spatial fabric.
If a rod of cancellation (Pathfinder Advanced Player’s
Guide) touches the sphere, both items explode, dealing 14d6
bludgeoning damage (DC 35 basic Reflex save) to everything in
a 60-foot burst from the point of their destruction.

TALISMAN OF THE SPHERE
RARE

ARTIFACT

EVOCATION

ITEM 20

MAGICAL

Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk —
This loop of adamantine can be slung on a chain to be worn as a
necklace, but must be held to convey its benefits. A creature that
can’t cast either arcane or occult spells takes 8d6 mental damage
just from picking up the item, and they take that damage again
at the start of each of their turns if they continue to hold it.
If the wielder can cast arcane or occult spells, they can use
the talisman of the sphere to more easily control a sphere of
annihilation. This reduces the DC of the check to control the
sphere or Sustain the Activation by 10.
Destruction The talisman of the sphere is destroyed if touched
by a sphere of annihilation.

113

18833921

4121868

4121868


Gamemastery Guide

GEMS AND ART OBJECTS

Many people treasure gems for their brilliant colors and for the alchemical or even magical
properties some have. Works of art and their value, meanwhile, vary as widely as the
concept of beauty between cultures. They may be more elegant versions of useful items, or
exist solely to be admired­and envied.
Much like coins, gems and art objects are valuable currency
worth their full Price when sold. When making a treasure
hoard, you can choose gems or art objects you like, or roll
randomly using percentile dice.

GEMS

Gems are naturally occurring minerals, typically in a
crystalline form, or, in a few cases, organic material such
as amber, coral, and pearls. All but the largest gems weigh
about half as much as a coin, so about 2,000 gems is 1
Bulk. Unworked gems are worth half the Price of a finished
gem and can serve as the minimum raw materials necessary
to Craft the finished gem. Lesser semiprecious stones are
level 0 items, moderate and greater semiprecious stones
are 1st‑level items, lesser and moderate precious stones
are 4th‑level items that require expert proficiency to Craft,
and greater precious stones are 7th-level items that require
master proficiency to Craft.

TABLE 2—23: GEMS

18833922

18833922

d%
Lesser Semiprecious Stones
1–7
Agate
8–14
Alabaster
15–21 Azurite
22–28 Hematite
29–35 Lapis lazuli
36–42 Malachite
43–49 Obsidian
50–56 Pearl, irregular freshwater
57–63 Pyrite
64–70 Rhodochrosite
71–77 Quartz, rock crystal
78–84 Shell
85–92 Tiger’s-eye
93–100 Turquoise
d%
Moderate Semiprecious Stones
1–7
Bloodstone
8–14
Carnelian
15–21 Chrysoprase
22–28 Citrine
29–35 Ivory
36–42 Jasper
43–49 Moonstone
50–56 Onyx
57–63 Peridot
64–70 Quartz, milky, rose, or smoky
71–77 Sard
78–84 Sardonyx

Price
1d4×5 sp
1d4×5 sp
1d4×5 sp
1d4×5 sp
1d4×5 sp
1d4×5 sp
1d4×5 sp
1d4×5 sp
1d4×5 sp
1d4×5 sp
1d4×5 sp
1d4×5 sp
1d4×5 sp
1d4×5 sp
Price
1d4×25 sp
1d4×25 sp
1d4×25 sp
1d4×25 sp
1d4×25 sp
1d4×25 sp
1d4×25 sp
1d4×25 sp
1d4×25 sp
1d4×25 sp
1d4×25 sp
1d4×25 sp

d%
Moderate Semiprecious Stones
85–92 Spinel, red or green
93–100 Zircon
d%
Greater Semiprecious Stones
1–10
Amber
11–20 Amethyst
21–30 Chrysoberyl
31–40 Coral
41–50 Garnet
51–60 Jade
61–70 Jet
71–80 Pearl, saltwater
81–90 Spinel, deep blue
91–100 Tourmaline
d%
Lesser Precious Stones
1–25
Aquamarine
26–50 Opal
51–75 Pearl, black
76–100 Topaz
d%
Moderate Precious Stones
1–25
Diamond, small
26–50 Emerald
51–75 Ruby, small
76–100 Sapphire
d%
Greater Precious Stones
1–25
Diamond, large
26–50 Emerald, brilliant green
51–75 Ruby, large
76–100 Star sapphire

Price
1d4×25 sp
1d4×25 sp
Price
1d4×5 gp
1d4×5 gp
1d4×5 gp
1d4×5 gp
1d4×5 gp
1d4×5 gp
1d4×5 gp
1d4×5 gp
1d4×5 gp
1d4×5 gp
Price
1d4×50 gp
1d4×50 gp
1d4×50 gp
1d4×50 gp
Price
1d4×100 gp
1d4×100 gp
1d4×100 gp
1d4×100 gp
Price
1d4×500 gp
1d4×500 gp
1d4×500 gp
1d4×500 gp

4121868

ART OBJECTS

These pieces of artwork have listed values, but might be
more valuable to a collector or someone with a personal
connection. When including art objects, consider whether
the PCs could discover this information and secure a greater
reward. For instance, a dwarven crown might be worth
1,000 gp for its exquisite crafting, but even more to the
dwarves who lost the crown of their first queen long ago.
This could also be a plot hook for a later adventure.
On the other hand, the materials used to make an art
object, such as the paint and the canvas of a painting, are
worth far less than the finished object. Some art objects on
Table 2–24 include uncommon or rare precious materials,
though usually not in large enough amounts for other
crafting purposes. If you’re rolling randomly and don’t want
to give out an uncommon or rare material, roll again or
modify the description (for instance, you might change the
mithral crown in the major art objects list to a gold crown).

114

18833922

4121869

4121869

18833923

18833923


Tools

TABLE 2—24: SAMPLE ART OBJECTS
d%
Minor Art Object
Price
1–5
Elegant cloth doll
1d4 gp
6–10
Scrimshaw whale bone
1d4 gp
11–15
Illustrated book
1d4 gp
16–20 Brass statuette of a bull
1d4 gp
21–25 Carved wooden game set
1d4 gp
26–30 Set of six ivory dice
1d4 gp
31–35 Engraved copper ring
1d4 gp
36–40 Lapis lazuli pendant
1d4 gp
41–45 Hand mirror with decorated frame
1d4 gp
46–50 Colorful velvet half mask
1d4 gp
51–55 Set of decorated ceramic plates
1d4 gp
56–60 Leather flagon with Caydenite symbol 1d4 gp
61–65 Bronze bowl with wave imagery
1d4 gp
66–70 Brass anklet
1d4 gp
71–75 Iron cauldron with gargoyle faces
1d4 gp
76–80 Silver religious symbol
1d4 gp
81–85 Bronze brazier with Asmodean artwork 1d4 gp
86–90 Plain brass censer
1d4 gp
91–95 Simple sculpture
1d4 gp
96–100 Simple painting
1d4 gp
d%
Lesser Art Object
Price
1–5
Silk ceremonial armor
1d4×10 gp
6–10
Inscribed crocodile skull
1d4×10 gp
11–15
Illuminated manuscript
1d4×10 gp
16–20 Simple silver circlet
1d4×10 gp
21–25 Copper statuette of a salamander
1d4×10 gp
26–30 Alabaster and obsidian game set
1d4×10 gp
31–35 Silk fan decorated with turquoise
1d4×10 gp
36–40 Ceremonial dagger with onyx hilt
1d4×10 gp
41–45 Amphora with lavish scenes
1d4×10 gp
46–50 Colorful pastoral tapestry
1d4×10 gp
51–55 Chrysoberyl symbol of an evil eye
1d4×10 gp
56–60 Alabaster idol
1d4×10 gp
61–65 Silk mask decorated with citrines
1d4×10 gp
66–70 Set of decorated porcelain plates
1d4×10 gp
71–75 Etched copper ewer
1d4×10 gp
76–80 Brass scepter with amethyst head
1d4×10 gp
81–85 Bronze chalice with bloodstones
1d4×10 gp
86–90 Iron and rock crystal brazier
1d4×10 gp
91–95 Quality sculpture by an unknown
1d4×10 gp
96–100 Quality painting by an unknown
1d4×10 gp
d%
Moderate Art Object
Price
1–5
Porcelain doll with amber eyes
1d4×25 gp
6–10
Marble altar
1d4×25 gp
11–15
Parade armor with flourishes
1d4×25 gp
16–20 Silver coronet with peridots
1d4×25 gp
21–25 Moonstone and onyx game set
1d4×25 gp
26–30 Gold and garnet ring
1d4×25 gp
31–35 Ceremonial shortsword with spinels 1d4×25 gp
36–40 Silver statuette of a raven
1d4×25 gp
41–45 Porcelain vase inlaid with gold
1d4×25 gp
46–50 Enormous tapestry of a major battle 1d4×25 gp
51–55 Gold necklace with peridots
1d4×25 gp
56–60 Virtuoso silver flute
1d4×25 gp

d%
Moderate Art Object
61–65 Coral idol of an elemental lord
66–70 Silver mirror with gilded frame
71–75 Silver flagon inscribed with fields
76–80 Copper and spinel puzzle box
81–85 Small cold iron cauldron with onyx
86–90 Silver and jade censer
91–95 Life-size sculpture by an expert
96–100 Wide landscape by an expert
d%
Greater Art Object
1–5
Gilded ceremonial armor
6–10
Ancient dragon skull etched with
mystic sigils
11–15
Original manuscript from a
world-famous author
16–20 Gold and aquamarine diadem
21–25 Gold dragon statuette
26–30 Jet and white gold game set
31–35 Gold rapier with amethysts
36–40 Gold urn with scenes of judgment
41–45 Splendid lyre of world-famous lyrist
46–50 Platinum-framed monocle
51–55 Gold mask of a high priest
56–60 Crystal dinner set, fine silverware
61–65 Gold and opal bracelet
66–70 Intricate silver and gold music box
71–75 Jeweled orrery of the planes
76–80 Gilded scepter with sapphire
81–85 Fine gold spyglass
86–90 Gold chalice with black pearls
91–95 Towering sculpture by a master
96–100 Famous portrait by a master
d%
Major Art Object
1–5
Jewel-encrusted gold altar
6–10
Saint’s bone with lost scriptures
11–15
Previously lost volume
from a legendary author
16–20 Jeweled mithral crown
21–25 Platinum dragon statuette
26–30 Diamond ring with platinum band
31–35 Star sapphire necklace
36–40 Darkwood violin by a legend
41–45 Platinum image of a fey noble
with a bit of orichalcum
46–50 Jeweled gold puzzle box
51–55 Crystallized dragon heart
56–60 Living flame shaped into a phoenix
61–65 Phasing ether silk tapestry
66–70 Solidified moment of time
71–75 Tankard owned by Cayden Cailean
76–80 Thought lens of astral essence
81–85 Divine art piece created by Shelyn
86–90 Chandelier crafted from dreams
91–95 Enormous chryselephantine
sculpture by a legend
96–100 Major painting by a legend

Price
1d4×25 gp
1d4×25 gp
1d4×25 gp
1d4×25 gp
1d4×25 gp
1d4×25 gp
1d4×25 gp
1d4×25 gp
Price
1d4×250 gp
1d4×250 gp

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules

1d4×250 gp
1d4×250 gp
1d4×250 gp
1d4×250 gp
1d4×250 gp
1d4×250 gp
1d4×250 gp
1d4×250 gp
1d4×250 gp
1d4×250 gp
1d4×250 gp
1d4×250 gp
1d4×250 gp
1d4×250 gp
1d4×250 gp
1d4×250 gp
1d4×250 gp
1d4×250 gp
Price
1d4×1,000 gp
1d4×1,000 gp
1d4×1,000 gp

NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121869

1d4×1,000 gp
1d4×1,000 gp
1d4×1,000 gp
1d4×1,000 gp
1d4×1,000 gp
1d4×1,000 gp
1d4×1,000 gp
1d4×1,000 gp
1d4×1,000 gp
1d4×1,000 gp
1d4×1,000 gp
1d4×1,000 gp
1d4×1,000 gp
1d4×1,000 gp
1d4×1,000 gp
1d4×1,000 gp
1d4×1,000 gp

115

18833923

4121870

4121870


Gamemastery Guide

AFFLICTIONS

Wherever there is life, there are insidious perils that threaten the health and well-being
of living creatures. Some of these afflictions, including many diseases, are inherent to the
natural world. Others, such as drugs, are crafted by people the world over for recreational,
unscrupulous, or other uses. And some—curses being the most notorious—exist solely to
cause harm to others.
Afflictions strike creatures with potent and often escalating
results. This section presents a variety of curses, diseases,
and drugs for use in your game. A broad sampling of
poisons can be found beginning on page 550 of the Core
Rulebook, and the rules for afflictions start on 457.
Depending on the tone of the campaign, the GM might
want to roll secret saving throws for PCs affected by an
affliction. This is particularly effective when the affliction
is an element within a survival or horror game, or when
it’s part of a mystery.

CURSES

A curse is a manifestation of potent ill will. Curses
typically have a single effect that takes place upon a failed
saving throw and lasts a specified amount of time, or can
be removed only by certain actions a character must
perform or conditions they must meet. Rarely, curses will
have stages; these follow the rules for afflictions.
Curses may come from a malicious action, such as a
lich’s Paralyzing Touch or a spell from an evil spellcaster.
Guardians of a tomb or treasure might ward their charge
with a curse as protection against thieves. In some rare
cases, a curse might manifest as a response to a terrible act,
such as a massacre. When using a curse in your game, assign
the curse to an item, location, situation, or similar element.
Then, decide on a trigger for the curse—such as a creature
attempting to steal a warded book, destroy a work of art, or
slay a specific creature. A curse can even be tied to a specific
location, in which case it functions as a simple hazard. Once
that trigger occurs, the curse affects the triggering creature
or creatures. Each affected creature must attempt a saving
throw against the curse; if they fail, they are subject to the
effects specified in the curse’s Effect entry.

18833924

18833924

CURSE OF NIGHTMARES
CURSE

ILLUSION

MAGICAL

CURSE 2
MENTAL

This curse plagues you with terrible nightmares whenever you
sleep, preventing you from resting properly.
Saving Throw DC 16 Will; Effect You must rest for 12 hours
instead of 8 to avoid becoming fatigued and can’t gain any
benefits from resting or long-term rest. You can still make
your daily preparations.

THEFT OF THOUGHT
CURSE

ENCHANTMENT

CURSE 3
MAGICAL

MENTAL

This curse protects a single book and activates against any
creature who Steals it.

Saving Throw DC 18 Will; Effect You begin to lose details from
your memories, as well as a portion of your procedural
memory. After being cursed, the first time you attempt a
check using a skill in which you are trained or better, your
proficiency rank in the skill used decreases by one rank for
as long as you are cursed.

SLAYER’S HAUNT
CURSE

ILLUSION

CURSE 4
MAGICAL

VISUAL

You are haunted by all those you have killed.
Saving Throw DC 19 Will; Effect You see all creatures around
you as those you have slain, still bearing their wounds.
You can’t identify, Recall Knowledge about, or otherwise
interact with these creatures in any way that involves
seeing their true form without first succeeding at a Will
save against the curse’s DC to see through the illusion.
On a critical failure for such a Will save, you become
frightened 1.

4121870

COWARD’S ROOTS
CURSE

ENCHANTMENT

CURSE 5
FEAR

MAGICAL

MENTAL

You find all courage stolen from your heart. When faced
with something frightening, you flee in terror or stand
frozen in place.
Saving Throw DC 20 Will; Effect At the start of your turn, if
you are frightened, you become your choice of immobilized
or fleeing until the end of that turn.

CURSE OF THE RAVENOUS
CURSE

MAGICAL

CURSE 5

TRANSMUTATION

This hideous curse kills through constant hunger. You become
gaunt and repeatedly gnash your teeth.
Saving Throw DC 20 Fortitude; Effect No matter how much
you eat, you aren’t satiated. After 1 day, you begin starving
(Core Rulebook 500). Each week, you receive a new saving
throw against the curse.

WIZARD’S WARD
ABJURATION

CURSE

CURSE 6
MAGICAL

A wizard’s ward is placed upon a single book, usually a
spellbook. If you damage the book, you must attempt a save
against the curse’s effect.
Saving Throw DC 22 Will; Effect You take 5d6 damage of the
same damage type as the damage you dealt to the book,
and the damage can’t be healed as long as the curse lasts.
Repairing the book, including replacing any missing text,
ends this curse.

116

18833924

4121871

4121871

18833925

18833925


Tools

OATH OF THE FLESH
ABJURATION

CURSE

CURSE 7
MAGICAL

CURSE

When you swear an oath, you must obey that oath or suffer
terrible consequences.
Saving Throw DC 23 Fortitude; Effect Each time you make a
promise to someone, an ornate symbol representing that
promise is magically carved into your flesh. Breaking any
of these promises causes the symbol tattoo to grow into
a gaping wound, dealing 3d6 slashing damage to you;
damage from the curse can’t be healed as long as the curse
is still in effect.

SELLSWORD’S FOLLY
CURSE

EMOTION

CURSE 9

ENCHANTMENT

MAGICAL

MENTAL

Even the most experienced combat veteran becomes as
reckless as a rookie when suffering from sellsword’s folly.
Saving Throw DC 26 Will; Effect The chaos of combat
overwhelms you. Each time you roll initiative for a combat
encounter, you must attempt a new saving throw against
the curse; on a failure, you become confused for 1 round.
This is an incapacitation effect.

CURSE OF SLUMBER
CURSE

INCAPACITATION

CURSE 11
MAGICAL

NECROMANCY

SLEEP

This legendary curse sends you into a sleep indistinguishable
from death.
Saving Throw DC 28 Fortitude; Effect You fall asleep for 1
round (or permanently on a critical failure) and seem to
be dead; a creature must succeed at a DC 30 Medicine
check to realize you are alive. Noise doesn’t awaken you,
but taking damage gives you a new saving throw against
the curse.

REVILING EARTH
CURSE

DEATH

CURSE 12
MAGICAL

NECROMANCY

A reviling earth curse usually appears across a specific
geographical region, such as a ruined town, a necromancer’s
domain, or a similar area.
Saving Throw DC 30 Fortitude; Effect When you enter the area,
you become doomed 1, or doomed 2 on a critical failure.

SPIRIT ANCHOR
CURSE

MAGICAL

CURSE 13
NECROMANCY

NEGATIVE

This curse prevents your soul from moving on after death.
Saving Throw DC 31 Fortitude; Effect If you die while affected,
your spirit is anchored to the Material Plane, and you
become a ghost or other incorporeal undead.

UNENDING THIRST
CURSE

TRANSMUTATION

REVILED OF NATURE

CURSE 15
MAGICAL

This curse kills through dehydration in the same vein as the
curse of the ravenous, but with deadly speed.
Saving Throw DC 32 Fortitude; Effect You gain no benefit from
drinking water or other liquids and begin suffering from
thirst (Core Rulebook 500). Each day, you receive a new
saving throw against the curse.

EMOTION

CURSE 18

ENCHANTMENT

MAGICAL

MENTAL

This curse makes the hunter into the hunted, drawing the ire
of animals wherever you go.
Saving Throw DC 38 Will; Effect Creatures of the natural
world abhor you. Whenever an animal becomes aware of
you, it must attempt a Will save against the curse. On a
failure, it attacks you and fights to the death.

THIEF’S RETRIBUTION
CONJURATION

CURSE

CURSE 19

SWORD OF ANATHEMA
DIVINE

introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems

MAGICAL

This punishment causes you to lose something dear to you
whenever you rob or steal. If you have nothing to lose, the
curse exacts its punishment upon your body instead.
Saving Throw DC 39 Fortitude; Effect Each time you steal
something, you lose something more valuable—this item
is whisked away and can’t be found again. Typically this
item is one of greater monetary value, but it might be one
of greater value in another sense, such as one of greater
emotional value, or something you need to complete a
task. If you aren’t carrying anything of greater value at
the time of the theft, you lose one of your limbs instead,
taking 10d6 slashing damage and losing use of that limb.
The damage can’t be healed, nor the limb restored, until
the stolen item is returned, even through use of spells
like regenerate.

CURSE

2

Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

CURSE 20

4121871

EVOCATION

With divine intervention, followers of a deity can bestow this
curse upon an enemy of the faith.
Saving Throw DC 40 Will; Effect You are marked by the deity
invoked as an enemy of the church. You gain weakness 10
to damage dealt by worshippers of that deity.

GRAVE CURSE
CURSE

NECROMANCY

CURSE, LEVEL VARIES
MAGICAL

A grave curse punishes you for stealing from a tomb or other
resting place.
Saving Throw Will save, with a high spell DC for a monster
of its level (page 65); Effect You are hounded by undead
creatures of the same level as the curse. Every night,
you must attempt a DC 15 flat check. On a failure, an
incorporeal undead manifests to hassle and harry you
throughout the night, retreating before it can take much
damage and often preventing you from gaining a full
night’s rest. Whenever you enter a graveyard or other
area where bodies are buried, you must succeed at the
same flat check or a body animates as a corporeal undead
(typically a skeleton or zombie) to attack you.
These undead are temporary and exist only to
harry you; if you take control of the undead, move on,
or otherwise avoid their attacks, incorporeal undead
discorporate and corporeal undead collapse into ordinary
corpses. The curse can be removed by returning the stolen
items to their resting place.

117

18833925

4121872

4121872


Gamemastery Guide

DISEASES

DISEASE 2

A pernicious disease spread by bloodsucking insects, malaria
sometimes enters long periods of dormancy. If you succumb
to malaria, you may continue to be periodically affected by the
disease, even if you’re cured. You can’t reduce your sickened
condition while affected with malaria.
Saving Throw DC 16 Fortitude; Onset 10 days; Stage 1
sickened 1 (1 day); Stage 2 sickened 2 (1 day); Stage 3
sickened 2, and disease recurs every 1d4 months even if
cured (1 day); Stage 4 unconscious (1 day); Stage 5 death

BOG ROT

BUBONIC PLAGUE

DISEASE 0

DISEASE

SCARLET FEVER

DISEASE 1

DISEASE

The relatively simple sore throat caused by this disease leads
many victims to initially dismiss it as a mild illness, but scarlet
fever can be deadly if left untreated. You can’t reduce your
sickened condition while affected with scarlet fever.
Saving Throw DC 13 Fortitude; Onset 2 days; Stage 1 sickened
1 (1 day); Stage 2 sickened 2 (1 day); Stage 3 sickened 3 and
can’t speak (1 day); Stage 4 death

TETANUS

DISEASE 1

DISEASE

An infection introduced through open wounds, tetanus can
produce stiffness, muscle spasms strong enough to break
bones, and ultimately death.
Saving Throw DC 14 Fortitude; Onset 10 days; Stage 1 clumsy
1 (1 week); Stage 2 clumsy 2 and can’t speak (1 day); Stage 3
paralyzed with spasms (1 day); Stage 4 death

TUBERCULOSIS

DISEASE

DISEASE 3

DISEASE

Sometimes called bog foot, bog rot is caused by having
waterlogged feet for an extended period of time. In addition to
the usual cures for an affliction, bog rot can be cured through
amputation of the affected appendages.
Saving Throw DC 13 Fortitude; Onset 1 day; Stage 1 clumsy
1 (1 day); Stage 2 clumsy 1 and a –5-foot status penalty
to Speed (1 day); Stage 3 clumsy 2 and a –10-foot status
penalty to Speed (1 day)

18833926

18833926

MALARIA

Exposure to disease can be a hazard, such as when PCs come
into contact with a plague-ridden corpse; such hazards
grant XP as a simple hazard of the disease’s level. When
a disease gives a sickened condition that can’t be reduced
until it runs its course, that typically means the disease has
symptoms such as a difficulty swallowing, loss of appetite,
or nausea that make eating and drinking difficult but not
impossible. Despite the condition’s prohibition on eating
or drinking, a creature can slowly and carefully eat and
drink as long as they aren’t in an encounter.

DISEASE 1

DISEASE

An extended respiratory disease, tuberculosis can pose
particular challenges to spellcasters and some performers due
to the intense coughing fits it produces.
Saving Throw DC 15 Fortitude; Onset 1 week; Stage 1 carrier
with no effects (1 week); Stage 2 coughing requires you to
succeed at a DC 5 flat check to Cast a Spell with a verbal
component or Activate an Item with a command component
(1 week); Stage 3 fatigued, can’t recover from the fatigued
condition, and coughing requires a successful DC 15 flat
check to Cast a Spell with a verbal component or Activate
an Item with a command component (1 week); Stage 4
unconscious (1 week); Stage 5 death

This widespread illness can sweep through entire communities,
leaving few unaffected. The first indication of the disease is
a telltale swelling of glands. In some cases, the disease can
move into your lungs (pneumonic plague) or blood (septicemic
plague), which is even more fatal. If you have bubonic plague,
you can’t remove the fatigued condition while affected.
Saving Throw DC 17 Fortitude; Onset 1 day; Stage 1 fatigued
(1 day); Stage 2 enfeebled 2 and fatigued (1 day); Stage 3
enfeebled 3, fatigued, and take 1d6 persistent bleed damage
every 1d20 minutes (1 day)

SCARLET LEPROSY
DISEASE

DISEASE 4

VIRULENT

Scarlet leprosy is widely feared for its devastating effects,
crushing bones and organs while making recovery nearly
impossible. Damage taken from scarlet leprosy can’t be healed
until the disease is cured.
Saving Throw DC 19 Fortitude; Onset 1 day; Stage 1 2d6
bludgeoning damage (1 day); Stage 2 2d6 bludgeoning
damage, and whenever you gain the wounded condition,
increase the condition value by 1 (1 day); Stage 3 4d6
bludgeoning damage and can’t heal any Hit Point damage
(1 day)

BONECHILL
DISEASE

NECROMANCY

4121872

DISEASE 5
PRIMAL

If you are wounded and exposed to persistent cold, you might
contract bonechill.
Saving Throw DC 20 Fortitude; Onset 1 day; Stage 1 clumsy 1
(1 day); Stage 2 clumsy 2 and can’t heal cold damage until
this disease is cured (1 day); Stage 3 clumsy 3 and all cold
temperature effects are one step more severe for the victim
(Core Rulebook 517) (1 day); Stage 4 paralyzed and all cold
temperature effects are one step more severe for the victim
(1 day)

CHOKING DEATH

DISEASE 6

DISEASE

This disease is capable of wiping out nations or even entire
continents. A few pockets of the disease still remain in Iobaria,
keeping that region’s population sparse.
Saving Throw DC 22 Fortitude; Onset 1 day; Stage 1 hoarse

118

18833926

4121873

4121873

18833927

18833927


Tools

voice but no other symptoms (1 day); Stage 2 drained 1 (1
day); Stage 3 drained 2 and can’t speak (1 day); Stage 4 death

BLINDING SICKNESS

DISEASE 7

DISEASE

Endemic to jungles of the Mwangi Expanse, blinding sickness
is transmitted by dirty water or the bites of certain creatures.
Saving Throw DC 23 Fortitude; Stage 1 carrier with no effects
(1 day); Stage 2 enfeebled 1 (1 day); Stage 3 enfeebled 2 (1
day); Stage 4 enfeebled 2 and permanently blinded (1 day);
Stage 5 enfeebled 4 (1 day); Stage 5 unconscious (1 day);
Stage 6 death

SEWER HAZE
DISEASE

DISEASE 7

VIRULENT

Many healers and alchemists suspect that sewer haze has
a supernatural origin, given its association with particularly
strong otyughs.
Saving Throw DC 23 Fortitude; Onset 2 days; Stage 1 stupefied
2 (1 day); Stage 2 drained 2 and stupefied 2 (1 day); Stage 3
drained 3 and stupefied 3 (1 day)

NIGHTMARE FEVER
DISEASE

NECROMANCY

against the disease’s DC or become confused for 1 minute (1
day); Stage 4 stupefied 4 and confused, damage does not end
the confused condition (1 day); Stage 5 unconscious (1 day);
Stage 6 death

CRIMSON OOZE
DISEASE

DISEASE 15

VIRULENT

This devastating fungus infects your hand and can be cured by
amputating the limb before you reach stage 4.
Saving Throw DC 34 Fortitude; Stage 1 clumsy 1 (1 day);
Stage 2 clumsy 2, and using the infected hand deals 3d6
persistent bleed damage (1 day); Stage 3 clumsy 2, stupefied
2, and the infected hand is unusable (1 day); Stage 4 clumsy
3, stupefied 3, and infected hand is permanently unusable
(1 day); Stage 5 confused, and damage does not end the
confused condition (1 day); Stage 6 death

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

DISEASE 8
OCCULT

Thought to be caused by a night hag’s curse, nightmare fever
inflicts you with terrible nightmares, and you awaken with the
wounds you received in your dreams. Some versions cause
you to dream of being wounded by bludgeoning or piercing
weapons, in which case you take that type of damage instead.
Damage and the fatigued condition caused by the disease
can’t be healed until the disease is removed.
Saving Throw DC 25 Will; Stage 1 2d6 slashing damage and
fatigued (1 day); Stage 2 4d6 slashing damage and fatigued
(1 day); Stage 3 4d6 slashing damage, fatigued, and
whenever you take slashing damage, you must succeed at a
Will save against the disease’s DC or become frightened 2 (1
day); Stage 4 6d6 slashing damage, fatigued, and whenever
you take slashing damage, you must succeed at a Will save
against the disease’s DC or become paralyzed for 1 round (1
day); Stage 5 6d6 slashing damage and unconscious

BRAIN WORMS
DISEASE

4121873

DISEASE 11

VIRULENT

Scholars suspect these brain parasites have an otherworldly
or extraplanar origin. Though transmitted by the bites of
infected targets, the disease remains relatively rare—most
hosts are killed by the effects before they can pass it on. While
infected, whenever you attack due to confusion, you bite your
target (if you don’t have a jaws or fangs attack, you deal
piercing damage as an unarmed attack with damage equal to
your lowest unarmed attack).
Saving Throw DC 28 Fortitude; Onset 1 day; Stage 1 stupefied 2
(1 day); Stage 2 stupefied 2, and whenever you take damage,
you must succeed at a Will save against the disease’s DC or
become confused for 1 round (1 day); Stage 3 stupefied 3, and
whenever you take damage, you must succeed at a Will save

119

18833927

4121874

4121874


Gamemastery Guide

DRUGS

Drugs offer short‑term benefits with harmful side effects
and long‑term consequences. These short‑term benefits,
such as euphoria, draw many to drugs, but addiction
keeps users hooked long after their first dose. A character
can voluntarily fail their initial save against a drug, but for
each dose they consume, they must attempt a saving throw
against addiction, a disease that represents cravings and
withdrawal. Addiction is unique to each drug, so a character
can be affected by multiple instances of addiction at once.
Certain drugs alter how addiction works for that
drug, adding the virulent trait to the addiction, limiting
the maximum stage a character can reach, or adding
additional stages beyond those listed in the base affliction.

ADDICTION

18833928

18833928

DISEASE, LEVEL VARIES

Track the maximum stage you reach with each drug’s addiction.
This maximum stage is separate from your current addiction
stage for the drug. The maximum stage can’t be reduced, even
if you fully remove the disease. When you take the drug, two
things happen: you attempt a saving throw against addiction,
and you suppress the effects of addiction for 1 day. Failing
a save against addiction caused by taking the drug causes
you to go to 1 stage higher than the maximum stage you had
previously reached (2 stages higher on a critical failure). If
you’re currently suffering from addiction when you attempt
a save from taking the drug, you can’t improve your stage; if
you succeed at the save, the stage remains the same as it was.
When you attempt your save against addiction each week,
the stage you are currently at can’t get worse—it can only
stay the same or improve. The conditions from addiction
can’t be removed while you are affected by the addiction,
and suppressing addiction by taking the drug only avoids the
effects—it doesn’t remove the disease.
Saving Throw Fortitude (DC equals that of the drug); Onset
1 day; Stage 1 fatigued (1 week); Stage 2 fatigued and
sickened 1 (1 week); Stage 3 fatigued, drained 1, and
sickened 1 (1 week); Stage 4 fatigued, drained 2, sickened 2,
and stupefied 2 (1 week)

ALCOHOL
ALCHEMICAL

ITEM 0
CONSUMABLE

DRUG

INGESTED

POISON

Price 1 cp or more
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Alcohol is a common substance available in stunning variety.
The Price of a dose of alcohol depends on the specific beverage.
You can’t recover from the sickened condition from alcohol
while affected.
If you fail a saving throw against alcohol other than initial saves,
the affliction’s stage doesn’t increase; the only way to increase the
stage of alcohol’s affliction is to consume more alcohol.
Saving Throw DC 12 Fortitude; Onset 10 minutes; Stage 1 +1
item bonus to saving throws against fear effects (10 minutes);
Stage 2 flat-footed, +1 item bonus to saving throws against fear
effects (10 minutes); Stage 3 clumsy 1, flat-footed, stupefied 2

(10 minutes); Stage 4 clumsy 2 and sickened 2 (10 minutes);
Stage 5 clumsy 2, sickened 2, and stupefied 2 (10 minutes);
Stage 6 unconscious (8 hours); Stage 7 death

BLOODEYE COFFEE
ALCHEMICAL

CONSUMABLE

ITEM 0
DRUG

INGESTED

POISON

Price 5 sp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
A strong blend including several spices common in the Padishah
Empire of Kelesh, bloodeye coffee is a favorite morning drink
across the Inner Sea region. The maximum addiction stage of
bloodeye coffee never progresses beyond stage 1.
Saving Throw DC 14 Fortitude; Onset 10 minutes; Maximum
Duration 8 hours; Stage 1 +1 item bonus to AC and saves
to which you are taking penalties caused by the fatigued
condition (10 minutes); Stage 2 stupefied 1 (1 hour); Stage 3
can’t recover from fatigued (1 day, after which the drug ends)

FLAYLEAF
ALCHEMICAL

ITEM 0
CONSUMABLE

DRUG

INGESTED

INHALED

POISON

Price 1 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
The flayleaf plant is relatively common, though the mildly
euphoric effects of smoking its dried leaves increase when it’s
sourced from plants specifically grown to produce such effects.
Saving Throw DC 12 Fortitude; Onset 10 minutes; Maximum
Duration 4 hours; Stage 1 +1 item bonus to saving throws
against mental effects (1 hour); Stage 2 fatigued and +1 item
bonus to saving throws against mental effects (1 hour);
Stage 3 fatigued and stupefied 1 (1 hour); Stage 4 fatigued,
frightened 2, stupefied 2 (1 hour)

BLOOD SAP
ALCHEMICAL

CONSUMABLE

4121874

ITEM 1
DRUG

INGESTED

POISON

Price 4 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This potent drug is distilled from a certain tropical vine into a
deep-red syrup that, over time, stains the user’s lips and teeth
a vivid shade of red.
Saving Throw DC 16 Fortitude; Onset 10 minutes; Maximum
Duration 3 hours; Stage 1 drained 1, +1 item bonus to
weapon and unarmed attack rolls, Acrobatics checks, and
Athletics checks (10 minutes); Stage 2 slowed 1 (1 hour)

REFINED PESH
ALCHEMICAL

CONSUMABLE

ITEM 1
DRUG

INGESTED

INHALED

POISON

Price 2 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
When eaten or smoked, pesh gives users a sense of well‑being,
sometimes with hallucinations, aggression, and exhaustion.
Saving Throw DC 12 Fortitude; Onset 1 minute; Maximum
Duration 6 hours; Stage 1 stupefied 1 and a +2 item bonus to

120

18833928

4121875

4121875

18833929

18833929


Tools

saves versus fear effects (1 minute); Stage 2 1 temporary Hit
Point per level (first time you reach this stage only), +2 item
bonus to saves versus fear effects, clumsy 1, and stupefied 1
(1 minute); Stage 3 clumsy 2 and stupefied 2 (1 hour)

SHIVER
ALCHEMICAL

ITEM 3
CONSUMABLE

DRUG

INGESTED

POISON

Price 10 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
A compound produced from the hallucinogenic venom of
certain spiders, shiver is common in black markets.
The addiction to shiver has the virulent trait.
Saving Throw DC 19 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 4
hours; Stage 1 whenever you become frightened, reduce
that condition’s value by 1 (10 minutes); Stage 2 clumsy 2
(1 hour); Stage 3 asleep (1 hour)

DREAMTIME TEA
ALCHEMICAL

CONSUMABLE

ITEM 4
DRUG

INGESTED

POISON

Price 13 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This lemony tea blended from rare Vudrani
herbs and flowers is widely circulated by occult
circles looking to transcend the boundaries of
reality. The saving throw for addiction to dreamtime
tea is DC 19.
Saving Throw DC 21 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 30 minutes;
Stage 1 stupefied 2 (1 minute); Stage 2 unconscious and can
ask a question with the effects of augury except the flat
check DC is 10 (10 minutes)

ZERK
ALCHEMICAL

ITEM 4
CONSUMABLE

DRUG

INJURY

POISON

Price 20 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This bitter paste is used among some gladiatorial rings for its
short-term benefits in a fight.
Saving Throw DC 20 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 1 hour; Stage
1 +2 item bonus to Perception rolls for initiative, and if you
have an addiction to zerk, your melee weapon and unarmed
attacks deal an extra 2 damage during the first round of a
combat encounter (1 minute); Stage 2 drained 1 (1 hour)

CYTILLESH
UNCOMMON

ALCHEMICAL

ITEM 5
CONSUMABLE

DRUG

INGESTED

POISON

Price 30 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Deros use cytillesh in a variety of ways, and some surface‑dwellers
seek out the fungus for their own use. Memories lost to cytillesh
can be restored through modify memory. The save for addiction
to cytillesh is DC 20, and the addiction has the virulent trait.
Saving Throw DC 15 Fortitude; Maximum Duration 8 hours;

DRUGS IN YOUR GAME
Drugs are socially complex, and including them in your
game has the potential to make some of your players
uncomfortable—particularly players who have struggled
with substance abuse themselves or seen friends and family
members go through that struggle. As with any potentially
difficult subject matter, you should discuss the role drugs
play in your game with your players and ensure that
all the players at the table are comfortable with the
material; if they aren’t, avoid the topic.
If you do include drugs in your game, consider the role
they’ll play. In some campaigns, drugs might simply
be an element of flavor and a tool characters use
to reach their goals; in others, the side effects
and risk of addiction might be a terrible price
to pay. The rules assume something of a middle
path, where drugs are addictive substances
that may provide a short‑term benefit but have
consequences. To make drugs more accessible in
your game, remove some of the more severe stages
of addiction. To make them more dangerous, add
the virulent trait to the addiction affliction, add
more stages with increasingly severe effects, or
increase the DC of the save against the addiction by
1 for every use of the drug, decreasing back to normal
over time as they stop using the drug.

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121875

Stage 1 stupefied 1 (1 minute); Stage 2 lose all memories
made in the previous hour (1 hour)

ELVEN ABSINTHE
ALCHEMICAL

CONSUMABLE

ITEM 5
DRUG

INGESTED

POISON

Price 25 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
Specialists in Kyonin prepare this emerald-green beverage.
Saving Throw DC 20 Fortitude; Onset 1 hour; Maximum
Duration 1 day; Stage 1 +2 item bonus to Diplomacy and
Performance checks (1 hour); Stage 2 drained 2 (1 hour);
Stage 3 stupefied 4 (1 hour)

SCOUR
UNCOMMON

ITEM 8
ALCHEMICAL

CONSUMABLE

DRUG

INGESTED

INHALED

POISON

Price 80 gp
Usage held in 1 hand; Bulk L
Activate [one-action] Interact
This gritty powder improves responsiveness but suppresses
thoughts and leaves you weakened. The saving throw for
addiction to scour is DC 30, and the addiction is virulent.
Saving Throw DC 25 Fortitude; Onset 1 hour; Maximum
Duration 6 hours; Stage 1 stupefied 2 and +2 item bonus
to Reflex saves and Dexterity-based skill checks (1 hour);
Stage 2 fatigued (1 hour); Stage 3 drained 2 and fatigued
(1 hour)

121

18833929

4121876

4121876


Gamemastery Guide

BUILDING WORLDS

As a Game Master, you control the details of the world your players explore. The Age of
Lost Omens campaign setting is a lush world suitable for countless adventures, but you
might prefer to adventure in entirely new worlds, where every aspect of the setting and
story is yours to decide!
Building your own campaign world can be a deeply
fulfilling creative process, as it lets you bring to life the
exact setting you envision. It gives you great flexibility,
in that you can build only as much as you need for the
next few adventures, and you can adapt the world on
the fly to meet the demands of your story. It also gives
you great control, allowing you to build precisely the
setting you need for the story you want to tell. Finally, it
bypasses some of the issues that can come with playing
within an existing campaign setting, where you might
create a narrative that contradicts published canon, or
your players might stumble across major plot or setting
spoilers. Whatever your world‑building goals, this chapter
guides you through the design process step by step.

DESIGN APPROACH

World building can be approached in many ways, but it
fundamentally comes down to a simple preference. Do
you start at a high level and zoom in, or do you start small
and build up? This section outlines a largely top‑down
approach, but you can design from the bottom up
simply by starting at the end of this section and working
backwards. Either way, you may find yourself skipping
between sections as inspiration strikes—and that’s OK!
When building a world, there’s a risk of becoming
overwhelmed by the sheer number of decisions to be
made. Remember that you don’t need to make every
decision for every aspect of your world all at once. Focus
first on the elements you need for your story and the
game, then add as much of the rest as you’d like. You’ll
also want to allow room for input from your players—
gaming sessions are more memorable and engaging when
the storytelling experience is shared between everyone
at the table (page 32 has more information on players
contributing to the narrative).
Before you decide anything else, however, you should
establish your concept and your goals. Do you envision
a high‑magic steampunk setting where humans are a
tiny minority? A world where the only magic derives
from squabbling pantheons of gods whose followers
are caught up in their wars for power? A quaint town
isolated from an otherwise‑unknown world beyond a
vast, impenetrable forest of mist‑choked, skeletal trees?
Are you designing a world for a multi‑year campaign,
or for a fast-paced one‑shot adventure? Having an idea
in mind will help steer your choices as you build your
world, and knowing your goals will help you focus on
building what you need.

18833930

18833930

TOP DOWN
The top‑down approach is great if you have a lot of time
to dedicate to world building. When designing a setting
from the top down, your initial focus is on the big picture.
You may already have an idea of the big movers and
shakers of your world or your multiverse. You may want
to chronicle a thousand years or more of the setting’s
history. You may have already sketched out a world map
with continents, nations, and trade routes spanning the
globe. This approach begins with broad generalities that
get more detailed as you design and during play.

BOTTOM UP
With a bottom‑up approach to world building, you
start small and local. Focus on the starting location and
immediate needs of your campaign, then expand outward
as the story unfolds. This strategy works well for those
with less time to devote to world building, as you need to
prepare only the minimum detail necessary to entice your
players toward adventure, fleshing out your world only
as the campaign requires it.

4121876

THE WORLD

While world building might include building much more
than a single planet, most adventures occur entirely on
one world. It’s a good idea to have a broad understanding
of that world as a whole.

PLANETARY BASICS
When designing the physical features of a campaign
world, you’ll want to determine its shape and the general
distribution of landmasses. You can also establish the
world’s size, though note the scale of a world generally has
a fairly small impact on the adventures taking place there.

Shape
In a fantasy setting, the shape of your world need not be
spherical as governed by the laws of physics. It could be
any shape you desire, and it need not be a planet at all!
Globe: Barring some catastrophe, worlds in our reality
are roughly spherical due to the influence of gravity.
Hollow World: What if the landmasses and civilizations
of a world existed on the inner surface of a hollow sphere?
In such a world, the horizon would climb upwards,
permitting creatures to see landmarks at extraordinary
distances. Light might emanate from a sun‑like orb in
the world’s center, from various other natural or magical
sources, or not at all.

122

18833930

4121877

4121877

18833931

18833931


Tools

Irregular: What if your world is flat, a toroid, or
shaped into a cylinder, cube, or other polyhedron? What
if it’s something even stranger? With such an unusual
shape, you may need to decide how gravity, atmosphere,
and other details function.

Landmass
The next major step in world creation is to sketch out
the planet’s oceans and major landmasses. On Earth,
these geological features are the result of plate tectonics.
In a fantasy world, however, the oceans might have been
cleaved from the land by the actions of titans, or the
continents shaped to suit a god’s whims. The following
are some common landmass types.
Archipelago: A stretch of vast ocean, dotted by chains
of small island groups, atolls, and islets.
Major Islands: A region of seas dominated by large
islands, each several hundred miles across.
Island‑Continent: An enormous island nearly the size
of a continent, surrounded by ocean.
Continent: A substantial landform that (usually) rests
on a tectonic plate and gradually shifts in position over
geologic timescales.
Supercontinent: An assembly of the world’s continental
blocks into a single immense landmass.

Plains: Mostly flat and unobstructed, plains are usually
at lower elevations, but they can also be found at higher
elevation on plateaus.
Urban: Cities and settlements are urban environments.
These areas are detailed in Settlements, beginning on
page 132.
Swamp: Wide floodplains, shallow lakes, and marshes
can appear at most latitudes.

Gamemastery
Basics

Extreme Environments

Subsystems

Some adventures lead to fantastic reaches of the world or
the multiverse that are seldom tread by mortals.
Aerial: A world might include windy realms of floating
islands and castles in the clouds.
Glacier: Massive sheets of dense ice, constantly
moving under their own immense weight, glaciers are
frozen wastelands riddled with columns of jagged ice and
snow‑covered crevasses.
Volcanic: Hellish landscapes of molten lava, burning
ash, and scorching temperatures pose immediate danger.
Undersea: A subset of aquatic environments, undersea
environments are those areas submerged beneath the waves.
Underground: Some worlds have deep natural
caverns, while others have extensive winding tunnels and
expansive realms below the surface.

ENVIRONMENT

MAPPING A WORLD

The environment and terrain of a region can pose as
much of a challenge to an adventuring party as any of
the foes they face. The following section references the
environment categories beginning on page 512 of the
Core Rulebook.

Many Game Masters like to have an overland map for
their local region, nation, or even the whole world. The
primary goal of this scale of map is to designate sites of
import to the campaign; you need not detail every hamlet
or woodland grove, but having a sense of the major
features can help you and the other players visualize the
world in which they’re playing.
Step 1. Coastlines: The easiest first step is to separate
land from sea. Regional maps may only have a single
shoreline, if any. At larger map scales, consider the
placement of major islands, archipelago chains, atolls,
and islets. A world map should consider the size and
placement of continents.
Step 2. Topography: Pencil in a rough ridgeline for
each mountain range in the region. Mountain ranges
are common along coastlines where continental plates
push together. If extended into the sea, mountain ranges
typically result in a chain of offshore islands. Indicate hills
in the regions adjacent to the mountains and elsewhere as
necessary to demonstrate elevation. Unmarked terrain on
an overland map is usually lowland plains.
Step 3. Watercourses: It’s important to keep in mind
that rivers flow downstream, from high elevation toward
the sea, always taking the path of least resistance.
Powerful watercourses might carve canyons or gorges
over millennia, but they should never cross through
mountain ranges. On a similar note, watercourses
don’t branch—tributaries join into rivers as they
flow downstream.

Common Environments
The following environments are common enough that
they might appear in nearly any adventure or world.
Aquatic: Oceans, seas, lakes, and other large waterways
are aquatic environments.
Arctic: Arctic environments usually appear near the
northern and southern extremes of a world, though extreme
elevation, unusually shaped worlds, and supernatural
forces could result in arctic terrain elsewhere.
Desert: Deserts can appear anywhere on a world where
precipitation is scant, even along some oceans. Any large
landmasses that entirely lack bodies of water are likely
to be deserts.
Forest: The composition of a forest depends on the
climate and the elevation, with thick jungles more
common near an equator, hardwood forests in more
temperate zones, and evergreens at higher latitudes and
elevations. Most worlds have a tree line—an elevation
above which trees can’t grow.
Mountain: A world’s highest peaks can stretch tens
of thousands of feet above sea level. This category also
includes hills, which are typically no more than 1,000
feet tall.

2
introduction

Tools

Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121877

123

18833931

4121878

4121878


Gamemastery Guide

CAMPAIGN REFERENCE
Before the campaign starts, you might want to begin the
outline for a campaign reference: a living document that you
can easily review and annotate during gameplay and that
records the geography, factions, history, characters, and
plots central to your campaign.

Step 4. Terrain and Environment: Sketch in interesting
terrain features such as forests, deserts, or tundra. You may
want to differentiate these environs, separating coniferous
and deciduous forests from tropical jungles or arctic taiga.
Environs not specifically called out on an overland map
are typically presumed to be some variety of grassland.
Step 5. Civilization: Now you’re ready to place the
elements of civilization. Major cities should typically be
located near fresh water and natural resources. Major
roads connect larger settlements, circumventing forests
and other difficult environs, but they may wind through
mountain passes when lucrative commerce demands
it. Add smaller settlements along your roads, further
connected by smaller roads and trails. Finally, draw
political boundaries and mark other sites of interest.

CIVILIZATION

With the major geographical features and terrain of your
world decided, you’ll next want to establish significant
nations and settlements.
When it comes to designing a world’s cultures, you
might want to focus primarily on those areas the party
is likely to explore first. This allows you to establish
the details and depth of one region’s peoples before
expanding out to address others. That’s not to say you
shouldn’t have ideas about the cultures beyond your
starting settlement—it just means you don’t need to
decide every detail of every culture all at once.
As always, you don’t need to demarcate every realm
on the globe or indicate every town, hamlet, and thorp.
Keep your focus on what you need for your story and
your adventure—leaving terra incognita can lead to stories
down the road as the party ventures further from home.

18833932

18833932

SOCIETAL BENCHMARKS
The following sections can help you establish certain
truths about your world as a whole. From there, you can
decide the details of specific cultural groups, including
whether they deviate from these global standards.

Technology
Throughout history, a major driver of world culture
has been the continuous advancement of technology
in warfare, agriculture, and industry. The following
categories roughly approximate real‑world technological
levels, but progress might vary on your world. What
heights of technology have been achieved? Have any
groups fallen behind or leaped ahead?

Primeval: Weapons and tools in this early era are
crafted primarily from bone, wood, or stone. Knowledge
of stonecutting allows early civilizations to raise stone
walls and buildings.
Ancient: Advancements in mining and metallurgy lead
to weapons and tools made from bronze. Crop rotation
and storage in granaries ensure greater survival in times
of famine. Trade between river and coastal settlements
is aided by oar‑ and sail‑powered galleys. Chariots come
into strong use during warfare.
Classical: Superior military tactics and engineered
roads allow for rapid deployment of infantry wielding
iron weapons and aided by mounted cavalry. Advances
in complex irrigation and construction of aqueducts
lead to an abundance of harvest foods and dramatic
improvements to sanitation.
Medieval: Warfare in this era is defined by iron armor,
crossbows, and weapons forged of fine steel.
Enlightenment: The development of black powder
and muzzle‑loaded, single‑shot firearms greatly changes
warfare, making plate armor mostly obsolete. Larger
ships permit ocean crossings and long‑range trade to
distant shores. The printing press speeds literacy and the
dissemination of new ideas.
Steam: Steam engines replace conveyances drawn
by animal power or sail, leading to a significant shift
from wood fuel to coal. Further advances in science
lead to dirigible airships and observation balloons.
Simple firearms are replaced by repeating revolvers and
bolt action rifles.

4121878

Divine Involvement
What is the nature of the gods? Do they even exist? If
so, are they omnipotent and omniscient? How does a
follower request their divine favor? The answers to these
questions will help you determine how strongly divine
faith impacts the cultures of your world.
None: Deities do not exist in this world, or if they do,
they are oblivious to or completely unconcerned with
mortal affairs. If they exist, they don’t make their presence
known, nor do they grant power to their worshippers.
Limited: Deities exist, though they remain aloof from
the mortal world and make their divine presence known
only to a chosen few.
Accepted: Divine influence is an accepted fact of
everyday life. Their will is enacted through priests and
organized religions. Divine avatars may appear in the
world during extreme circumstances.
Ubiquitous: Deities live among mortals, exerting their
divine will directly. Gods rule entire nations, commanding
absolute obedience from their faithful followers.

Magic
Does magic exist? If so, which traditions are available?
What are the sources of a spellcaster’s power, and how do
they gain and channel that magic?

124

18833932

4121879

4121879


Tools

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18833933

18833933

4121879

No Magic: Magic of any kind does not exist in this
world. Spells and magic effects do not function. Consider
the variants on page 196 to handle the lack of magic items.
Low Magic: Magic is mysterious and taboo. The few
practitioners of the mystical arts are feared or shunned.
Again, consider the variants on page 196 to handle the
relative scarcity of magic items.
Common: Magic is an accepted fact of everyday life,
though its mysteries are beyond the reach of most people.
Magic portals and gates can whisk travelers “in the
know” halfway across the world or to the other side of
the multiverse.
High Magic: Magic and magical items are commonplace
in society. It may be as easy to learn spellcasting as it is to
learn a new language. Magical objects simulate various
modern technologies.

DESIGNING NATIONS
For any nation you establish in your setting, you’ll want
to provide at least a minimal description—the core
concept of that nation. The amount of additional detail
you provide depends on the needs of your story. You
likely want to establish enough information to create a
stat block (page 130) for the nation your adventurers are
from, any nations they’re likely to spend significant time
in, and those nations’ main allied and enemy nations, if
they are likely to become part of the plot.

When building a nation, remember that the various
elements connect to the history of the land and its people,
its relationships with nearby nations, and the current
residents. This interconnectedness will help you build a
wealth of story hooks and provide immersive detail for
your players.
Beyond those basic details, the following considerations
can help flesh out the nations in your setting.

Location, Size, and Population
Major geographical boundaries, such as mountains,
seas, and large rivers, often present natural borders
for a realm. Depending on its leadership, culture, and
the resources available, a country may be as small as a
city‑state or as large as a continent‑sweeping empire.
Barring widely available technological or magical travel
and communication, most nations remain relatively
small (only a few hundred miles across), simply because
it becomes too difficult for a single governing entity to
oversee and maintain the entirety of a larger state.
National populations ebb and flow due to a multitude
of external factors. Advances in sanitation, medicine, and
agriculture can spur dramatic population growth, while
war, famine, or plague can devastate it. As a rule, smaller
nation‑states have a population around a hundred
thousand, while a continent‑spanning empire could swell
to well over a hundred million.

125

18833933

4121880

4121880


Gamemastery Guide

CONSCIENTIOUS CULTURE DESIGN
Creating fantasy cultures is a delicate topic, as it can be all
too easy to create a culture or a group based on damaging
stereotypes or simplistic reductions of real-world groups.
Creating entire cultures out of harmful genre tropes such
as “jungle savage” or “noble samurai” reduces real-world
cultures to caricatures and perpetuates stereotypes about
people from those cultures. Taking inspiration from the real
world is wonderful—our world is filled with an incredible
diversity of cultures and peoples—but you should do so with
care and respect for those sources.

Population size is only part of the equation. Figuring out
the ancestry ratios of that population and brainstorming
how the members of various ancestries interact can often
lead to interesting story ideas, or at least give you some
jumping‑off points when dreaming up how the nation
was founded and its later history.

Cultural Hallmarks
What elements of the nation’s predominant culture stand
out? A nation might have an unusual stance on religion,
a specific demographic, distinctive natural features,
noteworthy political views, or any number of unique
elements that differentiate it from other nations in your
region. These hallmarks can inform your decisions about
many other aspects of the nation.

18833934

18833934

History
How did the nation come to be? Has it stood since time
immemorial, a bastion of stability while the rest of the
world changes around it? Perhaps it was built over the
ruins of another civilization, destroyed by some forgotten
calamity. Or perhaps it is a young nation, born recently
amid ongoing strife in your world. What remnants of
the past can be found, or has the past been deliberately
hidden? How have the residents of the nation adapted to
change, and in what ways have they failed to do so?

Economy and Political Stances
Determine the key resources and industries that drive the
nation’s economy. The availability of natural resources can
establish national boundaries, local industry, and other
elements of the resident society. For example, an area with
few resources might have a nomadic society, while a nation
rich in resources might develop an opulent mercantile class.
These resources can also affect international relationships.
An area poor in a specific resource might have a strong trade
relationship with a nearby nation that has it, or they might
be at war! Nations also disagree about political structures,
public policy, religion, and any number of other factors.
You’ll also want to consider the significant NPCs of
each nation. This includes the official ruler, but it also
includes other major players, whether they act in an
official capacity or entirely behind the scenes.

BUILDING SETTLEMENTS
In Pathfinder, settlements are where characters can
rest, recharge, retrain, and dedicate themselves to other
downtime activities all in relative peace. Traditionally,
an adventuring band comes together in some kind of
settlement, be it a small hamlet nestled on the border of
some wild frontier or a bustling port city at the heart of a
nation. Some adventures take place entirely within a single
settlement, while in others the party visits settlements only
briefly between their adventures in the wilderness.
The first thing you should consider when building
a settlement is its role in your story. Is this a major
metropolis the heroes will visit again and again during
their adventurers? A backwater village where their
adventures begin? The distant capital from which an evil
tyrant issues cruel edicts? The settlement’s campaign role
will inform many of the other decisions you make about
the place.
Once you know why you need the settlement, consider
why it would exist in the world. Settlements are typically
founded near sources of fresh drinking water; most
commonly along a riverbank or a place with access to
adequate wells or springs. They additionally require some
kind of transit to other places, either roads or waterways.
While it may be easier to create a village or city merely to
serve the characters’ needs, determining what function it
has independent of the characters adds verisimilitude and
can provide hooks for further stories.
Settlements, on page 132, describes the components
of a settlement stat block, which you should create for
any settlement you expect your characters to visit. The
process of creating that stat block will help you further
flesh out your community.

4121880

Mapping a Settlement
Don’t underestimate the usefulness of sketching a map of
significant settlements, like the one where your adventure
starts. This isn’t intended to be a picture‑perfect rendition
drawn to scale, but rather to outline the rough shape
and size of the settlement. Be sure to highlight a few key
structures useful to the campaign. For more inspiration,
see the section on Drawing Maps (page 52).
Step 1. City Layout: The layout of a settlement is as
unique as the terrain upon which it is settled. First, decide
the major trade route for the settlement. This is typically
a river, which brings fresh water, fish, and fast transport
to the populace. Larger cities can sustain additional
growth with access to a deep‑water harbor or a major
overland trade road. Even settlements conceived with a
grid plan tend to stretch along established trade routes
before expanding outwards.
Step 2. Districts: Towns with a population over a
thousand typically have defensive walls. As a settlement
grows further in size and population, additional stone
fortifications are often constructed beyond the city center,
which further segment the city into districts or boroughs.

126

18833934

4121881

4121881

18833935

18833935


Tools

A metropolis, for example, might have several distinct
neighborhoods: Castle Ward, Noble Quarter, Temple
Hill, the Gardens, Scholars’ Court, Artisan Plaza, the
docks, the slums, and so forth.
Step 3. Markets and Shops: Designate one or more
open spaces in the settlement for a market square. This
marketplace typically grows in the city center, along a
major road intersecting the settlement’s primary trade
route. Lining the perimeter of the temporary tents and
stalls of a bazaar are permanent retail shops offering
pricier goods and services. Here in the beating heart
of city commerce, adventurers can arm themselves for
upcoming expeditions or sell their ill‑gotten gains once
making it back to the settlement.
Step 4. Inns: Heroes need a place to celebrate and
recover between adventures. In addition to both public
and private lodging, a settlement’s inns often serve food
and drink. As with the town market, inns are commonly
built in central locations where trade roads meet. In
your campaign, inns are ideal locations to spread gossip,
introduce notable NPCs, and initiate quests. For the right
price, innkeepers might rent strongboxes to secure money
and other valuables between adventures.
Step 5. Landmarks: To give your cities a sense of
personality and local flavor, design a handful of iconic
landmarks for the PCs to visit. Memorable names make
these landmarks more interesting. A random observatory
might be noteworthy, but the Celestial Watchtower has
an air of intrigue that could lead to a fun adventure hook.

RELIGION

The greatest stories from myth and legend speak of
immortals with incredible powers of creation and
destruction. Some meddle in the affairs of mortals,
shaping heroes and history at a whim, while others
remain aloof or oblivious to the mortal world. Regardless
of the world you’re building, religion (or even the absence
thereof) shapes the people and the stories you tell.

THEOLOGY
Religious traditions are commonly categorized by their
belief in one or more divine entities.
Polytheism: This belief system posits the existence of
many gods. Polytheistic gods typically espouse particular
areas of concern and often reflect the appearance of their
worshippers. The primary religious philosophy of the Age
of Lost Omens is polytheistic.
Dualism: This philosophy espouses an enduring conflict
between two diametrically opposed cosmic forces; most
commonly good and evil or law and chaos. Acolytes of
each faith almost always see themselves as righteous, and
those of the contrasting belief as false.
Monotheism: A monotheistic doctrine recognizes the
existence of only one true god. The supreme deity may
exhibit more than one aspect yet remain a single entity,
like Gozreh from the Age of Lost Omens.

Pantheism: Divine power arises from the universe itself,
or as a byproduct of the collective power of many deities
sharing some common facet, either way forming a vast,
all‑encompassing divine entity. Worshippers sometimes
appeal to or devote themselves to specific fundamental
concepts or aspects of the universe.
Animism: Rather than worshipping gods associated
with souls and spiritual essence from beyond, animism
sees the life force in each part of the world, whether it be
the trees of an old-growth forest or a towering waterfall.
An example of animism in the Age of Lost Omens is
the connection between the Shoanti people and their
totems, which they forge a relationship with when they
come of age.
Atheism: In some campaign worlds, the gods have all
died, abandoned their worshippers, or never existed at
all. Mortals of this world may still cling to belief and
establish religions in the name of the divine, but there are
no true deities to answer their prayers.

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

PANTHEONS
In polytheistic traditions, a pantheon is a divine hierarchy
of multiple (or even all) deities.
Universal: All deities in the setting belong to a single
pantheon. Different cultures might have their own names
for the god of magic, for instance, but only a single deity
answers their prayers.
Ancestral or Regional: Each ancestry or region worships
its own distinct pantheon. These pantheons coexist in the
same cosmology but establish control in separate divine
realms. Across the cosmos, several gods from disparate
pantheons may share the same area of concern, but they
seldom compete for worshippers from rival pantheons.
Competitive: The world contains smaller regional
pantheons competing for mortal worship. Only one
deity of a specific area of concern may ascend to greater
power across all the pantheons. As such, deities typically
have little loyalty to their own pantheons and may
actually switch to another pantheon if it earns them
additional worshippers.
None: The deities of this multiverse act as individuals
with no familial ties or common agenda binding them to
each other.

4121881

DEITIES
These immortal beings command vast power and influence
fueled by the faith and souls of mortal worshippers. In
Pathfinder, deities also dictate some of the abilities of
those champions and clerics who channel their power.
When designing deities, you’ll need to include the divine
statistics and devotee benefits described below.

Divine Rank
Gods are usually ranked in a divine hierarchy, from
newly ascended godlings to almighty creator gods of
unfathomable power.

127

18833935

4121882

4121882


Gamemastery Guide

God: Taking a position atop the divine pyramid, gods
command near unlimited power and resources. Their
mortal congregations are large and (usually) well funded.
Demigod: Demigods still possess a great deal of power,
though often in subservience to another god or simply
inferior to the power of a full god.
Quasi Deity: The weakest rank of divinity, many quasi
deities are recently ascended mortals who attained their
deific powers through ritual apotheosis, or planar natives
who have amassed divine power of their own.

Divine Statistics
In Pathfinder, deities are not only a narrative element of the
world, but also a mechanical component of some classes.
Alignment: A deity’s alignment reflects their innate
moral and ethical outlook. In the Lost Omens setting,
most deities maintain realms tied to the Outer Plane that
matches their alignment.
Areas of Concern: Each deity has one or more areas
of concern they have divine influence over. These
portfolios typically embrace universal concepts, such as
honor, night, or tranquility. Deities with similar areas
of concern may work in common cause or against each
other, depending on their goals and divine rank.
Edicts: Every deity has edicts, which are those tenets
they require their faithful—especially divinely empowered
clergy like champions and clerics—to promote in the
world. A deity usually has one to three simple and
straightforward edicts.
Anathema: The opposite of edicts, anathema are those
things a deity will not abide. Champions and clerics must
avoid their deity’s anathema or risk losing their divine
powers, and even lay worshippers usually feel guilty for
performing such acts, as they will be weighed against them
in the afterlife. Like edicts, a deity usually has two to three
simple and straightforward elements to their anathema.
Follower Alignments: Champions and clerics can gain
power from deities only if they share a compatible moral
disposition. Usually these allowed alignments are chosen
from those within one step of the deity’s alignments, with
NG, LN, CN, or NE deities rarely allowing N champions
and clerics. Less restrictive deities are rarer and occur
most often when the deity has multiple aspects or a
particularly wide view of things.

18833936

18833936

Devotee Benefits
Deities grant favored status and special power to the
most fervent and influential of their flock.
Divine Font: Clerics channel a deity’s divine power
as a font of negative or positive energy. Most often,
good‑aligned deities grant heal while evil deities grant
harm, with neutral deities most often offering a choice
between the two. However, there’s nothing inherently
good about positive energy or evil about negative energy,
so a specific deity’s divine font may vary based on their
areas of concern.

Divine Skill: Champions and clerics automatically
gain the trained proficiency rank in their deity’s divine
skill. Assign the deity one skill that synergizes well with
their areas of concern. For example, Intimidation would
be appropriate for a god of tyranny, or Deception for a
goddess of trickery.
Favored Weapon: Clerics gain access to their deity’s
favored weapon as well as the trained proficiency rank
with it; warpriest clerics gain additional benefits. Every
deity has a favored weapon. Because the benefits of
having an advanced favored weapon are very strong,
you should assign simple or martial favored weapons
unless a deity is so thematically linked with an advanced
weapon that you need to give them one.
Domains: Each deity grants a number of domains
that reflect their divine areas of concern. Champions
and clerics can learn the domain spells from their deity’s
domains. Pathfinder’s deities each have four domains, and
many have one or more alternative domains. Though this
number is usually enough to convey a deity’s portfolio
and give players sufficient options, you can give your
deities as many domains as you like.
Cleric Spells: When preparing spells, clerics can choose
from specific spells granted by the deity, in addition to
those available on the divine spell list. A deity always
grants a 1st‑level spell and usually two others, all chosen
from non‑divine spell lists. The exact number of spells
a deity grants can vary—a magic-focused deity might
grant one spell per level—though this shouldn’t exceed
one spell per level.

4121882

COSMOLOGY

An enduring curiosity among many cultures is to ask
what wonders lie beyond the night sky. Does anyone gaze
back from the moon above? What realms do the gods call
home, and what is it like to walk in their divine presence?
Is the mortal world at the center of the universe, or is all
life utterly insignificant? Spiritual ponderings like these
are central to belief systems across the globe. As a world
builder, you get to answer those enduring questions by
designing the multiverse in all its inexplicable grandeur.
The following are some aspects of your cosmology you
might consider, but as you decide these, you should also
consider how many of these details are known in your
world—and by whom.

THE UNIVERSE
The reality in which mortals live out their short existence
is known to sages and scholars by many names—the
universe, the Material Plane, or the mortal realm, among
others. The structure of the physical universe might follow
any of the following models, or it might be something
completely different.
Vast: The universe is an unimaginably sparse void of
infinite space, littered with stars, planets, and various bits
of detritus.

128

18833936

4121883

4121883

18833937

18833937


Tools

Limited: The physical universe in your campaign
world may be smaller in scope yet far more fanciful.
For example, in Hinduism, the cosmos is supported
on the backs of four elephants, themselves standing
upon the shell of a world‑sized tortoise, whereas Norse
cosmology describes nine worlds connected by an
immense ash tree.
Bizarre: Sometimes the universe is more complex than
the previous two categories, or possibly nested within
multiple realities. What if the universe the PCs first know
is in fact a magical or mechanical simulation of such
complexity that its inhabitants are unaware that they
themselves exist as an artificial consciousness?

THE MULTIVERSE
In Pathfinder, the physical universe of your world is one
plane within a much broader multiverse. The Planes, on
page 136, details how planes work and the multiverse of
the Age of Lost Omens, but you can fit planes to your story
and world, or even build a new multiverse from scratch!
Perhaps there are only two planes beyond the material
universe, diametrically opposed and fighting over mortal
souls, or the multiverse consists only of a series of infinite
alternate realities. The options are truly infinite, limited
only by your imagination and the story you want to tell.

COMPOSITION OF OUTER SPACE
The spaces between the stars can also affect the stories
told in that world.
Vacuum: In conventional astronomy, outer space is an
immense void existing in a near‑perfect vacuum. In some
settings—including the Age of Lost Omens, where it is
known as the Dark Tapestry—the trackless firmament
between the stars is an ominous expanse home only to
terrible beings of incomprehensible malice.
Endless Sky: What if the blue sky overhead extended
outward forever? One need only fly high enough and far
enough to reach another world.
Celestial Spheres: The ancient Greeks posited
that planets, stars, are more were embedded
like jewels within celestial orbs of quintessence
nested within one another.

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121883

SOLAR SYSTEM
What is the shape and structure of the solar system
containing your game world?
Heliocentric: Physics dictate that all planets in a system
orbit the sun.
Geocentric: What if your game world
is in fact the center of the star system, or
perhaps even the center of the known universe?
Dyson Sphere: Perhaps a solar system has been
enclosed in an artificial structure designed to harness
the power of the sun.

PLANETS AND MOONS
In antiquity, astronomers noticed that some of the
twinkling lights in the night sky moved differently than the
others. In time, these celestial wanderers would come to be
known as planets, many with their own complement of
orbiting moons. Are there other planets orbiting your
world’s sun? Are they terrestrial, gas giants,
or something less common? How many
moons are there? The characters may
never venture there, but celestial bodies can
have a strong influence on a culture and help
you describe your world in an evocative
and distinctive way.

129

18833937

4121884

4121884


Gamemastery Guide

NATIONS

From the smallest of city-states to a continent-spanning empire, nations define the political
landscape of a setting and inform local culture and traditions. Knowing the details of a
nation can help you as a Game Master, whether your game revolves around international
disputes or you simply need to know what languages the common people are likely to speak.
Nations vary tremendously, from massive empires to isolated
island realms, and their characteristics can give flavor and
depth to your story and the PCs’ adventures. An encounter
in shadowy Nidal, where allegiance to Zon‑Kuthon has
literally blocked the sun from the sky, is going to have a very
different tone than one in sun-drenched Thuvia. A nation
working to overcome generations of xenophobia, like
Kyonin, might have a different reaction to adventurers than
a long-established empire like Taldor. A journey into a new
nation can introduce the heroes to a new people (if the party
visits the hobgoblin nation of Oprak), a new philosophy
(such as the materialistic Prophecies of Kalistrade in Druma),
or a new foe (as visitors to the undead-ridden Gravelands
will certainly learn).
Nations can also provide adventuring inspiration
and hooks. When the heroes are caught in the crossfire
between two nations in conflict, national concerns
become their own. Learning more about a nation’s history
or practices might lead to a great finding—or a loathsome
practice the characters want to eradicate. A party might
get involved in the political machinations of a nation’s
elite power mongers, or they might fall out of favor and
find themselves on the run from the law!
Nations also influence a character’s story on a personal
level. A nation can suggest a character’s ancestry, inform
the languages they speak, and influence their choice of
deity. As a GM, the relationship between a character and
a nation can provide opportunities to better hook that
character into your campaign. Has the character always
lived there, or have they emigrated from elsewhere—and
why? A character who fled due to political persecution
might have long-standing enemies, while a hero who left
due to ideological differences might have friends and
family who seek to return them to the fold.

18833938

18833938

NATION STAT BLOCK

The stat block for a nation presents the core information
about a nation in a simple, streamlined format.

NATION NAME
ALIGNMENT

NATION

OTHER TRAITS

As with any stat block, a nation has a list of traits that convey
its properties at a glance. The most significant of these is the
nation’s alignment trait, which indicates the alignment of the
nation and its government as a whole. This doesn’t necessarily
reflect the alignment of its people, though—a nation is rarely
monolithic, and the alignments of its people may differ
drastically from those of the nation as a whole.

Any other traits in the nation stat block reflect overarching
characteristics about that nation. For example, the elven nation
of Kyonin has the elf trait, indicating that it was created by
and remains almost exclusively populated by elves. Similarly, a
nation with an extremely particular focus might have a trait to
represent that, such as Galt, which has the revolutionary trait.
Following the traits is a brief summary of the nation.
Government This names the formal government and describes
the nation’s governmental structure, such as a hereditary
monarchy, an elected council, or a theocratic dictatorship.
Capital This is the established seat of the nation’s government,
with the city’s population in parentheses.
Population The predominant ancestries of the nation are listed
here, ordered from most to least common.
Languages The languages commonly spoken in the nation
appear here, listed alphabetically.
Religions This lists the religions and philosophies commonly
practiced in the nation. If a nation has a state religion, this is
indicated in parentheses following that religion. If a nation
has prohibited any religions, those are listed in a Prohibited
entry following the common religions.
Other Characteristics A nation might have distinctive
features that set it apart from other nations, such as the
predominance of firearms in Alkenstar. Each such feature is
detailed in this entry, though a nation rarely has more than
one or two of these entries, and many don’t have any.
Primary Exports This lists the nation’s primary exports, such as
raw materials, finished goods, services, and other resources.
If the nation has no exports of note, this entry is omitted.
Primary Imports Much like primary exports, this entry details
the resources commonly imported by the nation. Like exports,
if the nation has no imports of note, this entry is omitted.
Allies This entry lists other nations, and occasionally large
organizations, allied with the nation. It is omitted for
nations with no significant relationships.
Enemies Other nations (and sometimes organizations) that
oppose the nation appear here. This entry is omitted for
nations with no enemies to speak of.
Factions Any significant organizations or factions operating
within the nation are listed in this entry.
Threats This entry lists various threats the nation faces, such
as aggression from neighboring nations, natural disasters,
economic instability, magical anomalies, and so on.
Significant NPCs The final section of the nation’s stat block
presents the most significant NPCs of that nation, including
its ruler. These may not be the most powerful or influential
individuals in the nation, and instead are those most likely
to be known by people within and outside of the nation.

4121884

130

18833938

4121885

4121885


Tools

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18833939

18833939

4121885

NATIONS OF LOST OMENS

RAHADOUM

Presented below are stat blocks for two nations from
the Lost Omens Campaign Setting. You can use these as
examples when building your own nation stat blocks.

ANDORAN

NATION

NG

Fledgling democracy in pursuit of freedom for all.
Government The People’s Council (parliamentary democracy)
Capital Almas (76,600)
Population humans (Taldan), halflings, kobolds, dwarves
Languages Common
Religions Abadar, Cayden Cailean, Erastil, Iomedae, Shelyn
Primary Exports ancient treasures and artifacts, financial
credit, lumber, minerals
Enemies autocratic governments concerned about potential
domestic revolts, Cheliax, Katapesh, slavers
Factions Bellflower Network, Eagle Knights, Lumber
Consortium
Threats rising aggression from Cheliax, retaliation from
slavers, corruption among elected officials
Andira Marusek (LG female human warrior) Supreme Elect of
the Executive Office and mayor of Almas
Reginald Cormoth (LG male human commander) Eagle Knight
Commander General
Felandriel Morgethai (CG female elf wizard) Almas University
provost

NATION

LN

Desert nation unified by a humanistic worldview and rejection
of religion.
Government Council of Elders (representative council)
Capital Azir (72,370)
Population humans (Garundi, Mauxi)
Languages Common, Osiriani
Religions Laws of Mortality; Prohibited all divine religions
Irreligious All worship of deities is prohibited by Rahadoumi
law. Religious symbols and items are confiscated and
proselytization incurs a heavy fine. Rahadoumi citizens
perform healing through only mundane means or
non‑divine magic.
Primary Exports base metals, fine cloth, gemstones, herbal
remedies, mechanical innovations, produce, salt, tools
Primary Imports lumber, pesh
Enemies pirates of the Shackles, Red Mantis, religious groups
Factions Aspis Consortium, Pure Legion
Threats conflict among neighboring nations, desert-dwelling
monsters, disease, rapidly accelerating desertification
Malduoni (LN male human politician) Keeper of the First Law,
elected by the Council of Elders
Kassi Aziril (NG female human doctor) “Mother of Modern
Medicine,” renowned medical researcher and philanthropist
Salim Ghadafar (LN male human inquisitor) former Pure
Legion captain forced into Pharasma’s service

131

18833939

4121886

4121886


Gamemastery Guide

SETTLEMENTS

Adventures have to start somewhere, and everyone needs some semblance of a home.
Settlements are where characters can rest, recharge, retrain, and dedicate themselves to
other downtime activities, all in relative peace. But settlements can also hold their own
intrigues and dangers, providing adventure opportunities of their own.
For some players, a settlement may be nothing more
than a convenient place to purchase gear and sell loot.
For others, a settlement might be a beloved home they’re
willing to risk everything to protect. And sometimes, an
entire campaign takes place entirely within the walls of
a single city.

18833940

Designing adventures in a settlement generally follows
the guidelines presented in Adventure Design on page 40.
However, a settlement’s greater population density also
allows for a number of adventure styles and elements that
aren’t as common beyond the city walls.
Social encounters are one of the most common
interactions within a settlement, starting with the guards
at the city gates all the way to an audience with the
queen. The influence and reputation subsystems (pages
151 and 164, respectively) can facilitate these interactions
in a more structured way. Chase scenes, using the rules
starting on page 156, are an iconic component of a
settlement adventure, especially in a larger city, where
dense buildings and a variety of structures make for an
exciting series of obstacles. A settlement is also an ideal
place for a party to conduct an infiltration (page 160).
Since most libraries, archives, and similar repositories of
information are located within settlements, you might
make use of the research rules (page 154). Ambitious
characters might want to build up their own organizations
using the leadership subsystem (page 168).

Where there are people, there is commerce. The Buying
and Selling section on page 24 provides several sets of
guidelines for handling commerce in your game, but it can
also be helpful to have a sense of what items and economic
power a given settlement has on its own merits.
In a given settlement, a character can usually purchase
any common item (including formulas, alchemical items,
and magic items) that is of the same or lower level than
the settlement’s. Usually, fewer of the highest-level items
are available—you can use Table 10–9: Party Treasure by
Level on page 509 of the Core Rulebook as a guideline for
how many of the highest-level items might be available,
using the Permanent Items and Consumables entries for a
level 1 lower than the settlement’s actual level. Inhabitants
of a settlement can usually purchase items from PCs as
long as those items are the same or lower level than the
settlement, with limitations on higher-level items similar
to those available for sale. If a settlement’s population is
significantly smaller than its level would suggest, its ability
to provide and purchase items may be more limited.
If a character’s level is higher than the settlement’s, that
character can usually use their own influence and leverage
to acquire higher-level items, as they convince shops to place
specialty orders or artisans to craft custom goods, though it
might take a bit of time for such orders to be fulfilled.
Spellcasting services are available in many settlements.
Barring a powerful spellcasting NPC in the city with
whom the party could negotiate for services, a character
can find someone to cast common spells up to a level that
could be cast by an NPC of the settlement’s level. For
example, a character in a 9th-level city can typically find
and pay someone to cast a 5th-level common spell—the
highest spell available to a 9th-level spellcaster.
Some settlements have access to uncommon items,
formulas, and spells. If a settlement could reasonably be
considered to meet the Access entry for an item or spell,
that item or spell is available just like any common item.
For example, the dwarven settlement of Kraggodan has
plenty of dwarf weapons available.

Modes of Play

POWER STRUCTURES

Just like in other adventure locations, all three modes
of play can happen in settlements. Since a settlement
presents far more opportunities for noncombat activities
than most other environments, characters likely spend
most of their time in exploration mode. Downtime almost
exclusively takes place within a settlement.

Outside of city limits, adventurers spend much of their time
operating on their own terms, accountable only to their own
moral code. But in a settlement, the heroes become part of
a larger system with its own codified laws, procedures, and
enforcement. The details of a settlement’s power structures
shape the party’s interactions within that settlement.

SETTLEMENTS IN A GAME

Given the variety of roles a settlement can play in
an adventure, a Game Master should have a firm
understanding of how they work in the game and how
to best use them. Virtually every settlement uses the
rules for urban environments presented starting on page
514 of the Pathfinder Core Rulebook. Those rules are
primarily intended for encounter mode, however, and so
the following guidance can help you best use a settlement
in the broader narrative of your game.

SETTLEMENT ADVENTURES
18833940

MARKETPLACES

4121886

132

18833940

4121887

4121887


Tools

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18833941

18833941

4121887

Government
The government of a settlement often reflects the nature
of that settlement. A lawful, militaristic city likely has a
hierarchical government with a single figure at the top, a
crossroads market town might be under the control of its
wealthiest merchant families, and a farming community
might simply look to the oldest residents for leadership
as necessary.
That said, the lawful and publicly recognized ruler of
a settlement isn’t always the one calling the shots. They
may merely be a puppet to a secret entity that silently
pulls the strings from the shadows. Some settlements
are ruled by hidden cabals, from strange religious sects
to thieves’ guilds. A settlement might be swayed by
politically powerful residents, such an occult vizier or a
political savvy high priest. In some cases, the legitimate
authority may seem to govern but has actually been
replaced by a faceless stalker, a devil in disguise, or
another powerful shapechanger.

Legal Codes
Most civilizations agree that laws are necessary to ensure
a functioning society. The specific laws range from one
settlement to another, and they might be as simple as a
prohibition against murder and theft to exceptionally
convoluted regulatory schemes dictating everything from
clothing details to available confections. How well known

these laws are can further flavor a party’s interactions
with that settlement, as it’s likely easier to navigate a
well-documented system than one in which the rules are
learned only through experience and word of mouth.
Much like a government, the legal codes reflect the
settlement’s alignment and overall nature. Generally
speaking, a more lawful settlement is likely to have more
complex laws, and a more lax locale to have fewer and
simpler laws.

Law Enforcement
Most settlements have systems in place to enforce their
laws. In a small village, the residents might just police
themselves, holding one another accountable to their
shared values. Towns and larger settlements usually have
some system of guards, whether that’s a post filled by a
rotation of volunteers or a city guard of professionals
paid by the city’s government to maintain order. Most
settlements have some way of dealing with criminals, from
fines to public stocks to prison cells, as well as individuals
responsible for meting out those sentences.

Organizations, Churches, and Factions
The government isn’t the only influential factor in a
settlement. Prestigious organizations, prominent churches,
and specialized factions all wield power as well, often
in conflict with the official government or one another.

133

18833941

4121888

4121888


Gamemastery Guide

COMMON NPCS
Several categories of NPCs are quite common in settlements,
if not exclusive to them. The following sections from the
NPC Gallery of this book provide statistics and additional
useful information for running settlements.
• Courtiers (page 206) The upper crust of society is most
common in larger settlements.
• Magistrates (page 224) These public officials create and
implement the law.
• Officers (page 232) Officers are responsible for enforcing
the law in a settlement.
• Performers (page 236) Performers are most common in
settlements, where there are large audiences.
• Publicans (page 238) Nearly every settlement has at least
one gathering place and its regulars.
• Scholars (page 240) Most repositories of lore are located
within settlements.
• Tradespeople (page 244) Tradespeople provide the skilled
labor that keeps a town supplied and running.

Religious congregations usually wield significant power
in communities where faith is strong. A wizard, sorcerer,
or bard of even moderate magical talent would be a rare
and influential member of society in a small settlement.
An organization can wield overt influence over the
community where they’re based, or subtle control, as
the Pathfinder Society does in Absalom. Other notable
factions may include noble houses, wealthy merchants,
innkeepers, and retired soldiers and adventurers.

18833942

18833942

Corruption
In any settlement, it’s possible for officials to put their
own interests before those of the people they serve.
Corruption might be as simple as a clerk willing to accept
a bribe to expedite some paperwork, or it might be as
sinister as selling civilians into slavery.

SETTLEMENT STAT BLOCK

A settlement’s stat block consolidates the basic information
about a settlement into a centralized format.

SETTLEMENT NAME
ALIGNMENT TYPE

SETTLEMENT (LEVEL)

OTHER TRAITS

The first elements of a settlement stat block are its name
and level. A settlement’s level represents its relative size and
economic capacity, as well as roughly corresponding to the
maximum level of NPC that can be found there, not counting
significant NPCs listed below. In general, any common items
with a level no higher than the settlement’s level are available
for purchase (though a character of a higher level can usually
ferret out or custom order higher-level items). In addition, the
settlement’s level is used to help determine the maximum
possible task level that could become available there to Earn
Income (Core Rulebook 504). Both these are simply guidelines,
however, and a GM should make exceptions at their discretion.

Following the settlement’s heading are its traits. The first of
these is the trait representing the settlement’s alignment. This
trait represents the alignment of the settlement’s government
and overall society, and while it may indicate a trend, it doesn’t
dictate the alignment of every individual citizen. After the
alignment trait is the trait for the type of settlement: village,
town, city, or metropolis. This trait generally reflects the size of
the settlement, but it also tends to correlate to a settlement’s
level. A village is usually level 0–1, a town level 2–4, a city level
5–7, and a metropolis 8 or above, though the presence of many
higher-level or wealthy residents could easily skew the level
of a village, town, or city upwards.
A settlement might have other traits in addition to its
alignment and type traits. For example, the dwarven sky
citadel of Kraggodan has the dwarf trait, since it was built and
is predominantly occupied by dwarves. The city of Lepidstadt
in Ustalav has the academic trait, due to its focus around the
prestigious University of Lepidstadt.
Following the settlement’s traits is a simple sentence that
provides a short description of the settlement and its role in
the story or region.
Government This entry describes the settlement’s governing
entity, such as a mayor, the town elder, an elected council,
and so on.
Population The settlement’s total population is listed here,
followed by a breakdown of the population by ancestry
in parentheses.
Languages The languages commonly spoken in the settlement
are listed here, ordered alphabetically.
Religions This entry lists the religions and philosophies
commonly practiced in the settlement. If the settlement
has an official religion, that is indicated in parenthesis. If
the settlement has prohibited any religions or philosophies,
those are listed in a Prohibited entry following the
Religions entry.
Threats This entry lists the major threats facing the settlement,
such as ongoing drought or famine, political uprisings,
criminal activity, and the like.
Other Characteristics A settlement might have distinctive
features that affect its residents or visitors entering the
city, such as a particular trade that makes certain items
more available.
Significant NPCs The final section of the settlement stat block
presents the most significant NPCs of that settlement.
This usually includes the settlement’s official leader, if
it’s a single person. It also includes other movers and
shakers, local celebrities, and persons of particular interest
to adventurers.

4121888

SAMPLE SETTLEMENT ABILITIES
Here are some common settlement abilities you can use
to customize a settlement of your own creation.
Artists’ Haven: Residents of this city have a deep
appreciation for fine art. It’s easier to find higher-level
tasks involving Performance or art, as well as buyers
willing to pay more for art objects.

134

18833942

4121889

4121889

18833943

18833943


Tools

City of Artisans: Items of up to 4 levels higher are
available from a particular category the settlement is
famous for, such as armor and weapons.
Magical Academy: The settlement prides itself on
teaching magic, and its residents are skilled at teaching
others. Choose a magical tradition or traditions suitable
to your settlement. When a PC pays an NPC to teach
them a new spell of that tradition in the settlement, the
NPC assists the process and provides an additional +2
circumstance bonus to the check to Learn the Spell.
Religious Bias: This settlement has a strong
affiliation with a particular religion. Anyone who is
visibly a worshipper of that deity gains a +1
circumstance bonus to Diplomacy checks to
Make an Impression, Request, and Gather
Information. Characters who visibly
worship one of that deity’s foes take
a –1 circumstance penalty to the
same actions.
Scholarly: An abundance
of public libraries or
other accessible places
of learning within this
settlement means that with
1d4 hours, a character can
access a scholarly journal
on a relevant common
subject (Core Rulebook
291) before attempting to
Recall Knowledge.

CHANGING A SETTLEMENT
Sometimes the characters spend a
long period of time in a single settlement.
Perhaps it’s their home base, where they spend their
downtime between adventures, or perhaps the entire
adventure takes place there. In these cases, you might
find you need to update your settlement stat block as it
changes over time.
Several elements of the settlement stat block are
simple to update; you change the population as it
grows or shrinks, and you change the leaders on your
stat block as different people move between those
positions. But you also might make changes that
reflect the results of the PCs’ adventures. If the heroes
eliminated a major threat facing the settlement, you
should remove that threat from the stat block—but if
they drew the wrath of a new foe in doing so, you
might add that new threat! You can also update the
stat block’s abilities, should the PCs’ actions have that
large an influence on the city. For example, if the party
(using the leadership subsystem on page 168) built up
a wizard school focused on crafting magical items,
you might add an ability to the settlement stat block
that increased the availability of magic items in the
settlement’s markets.

SETTLEMENTS OF LOST OMENS
PORT PERIL
CN

introduction

SETTLEMENT 11

METROPOLIS

Pirate city and black-market capital of the Shackles.
Government Hurricane Queen (overlord)
Population 43,270 (65% humans, 10% half-elves, 8% half-orcs,
5% gnomes, 5% halflings, 7% other)
Languages Common, Kelish, Osiriani
Religions Besmara, Cayden Cailean, Gozreh
Threats anti-pirate policing from the Inner Sea region, opposing
pirate forces, supernatural storms from the Eye of Abendego
Pirate Town Port Peril thrives on black-market
and stolen goods. Items that might be difficult
to acquire or dispose of in other settlements
due to legality can be purchased and sold
more easily in Port Peril. NPCs begin with an
attitude one step worse than usual toward
characters openly displaying insignia of
law-enforcement agencies, religious
iconography of lawful deities, or
affiliation with a lawful nation.
Pherias Jakar (CN female elf
troubadour) merchant master and
joint overseer of Port Peril
Sabas Odabio (LN male human
administrator) accountant and
joint overseer of Port Peril
Tessa Fairwind (CN female half-elf
pirate lord) Hurricane Queen of the
Shackles
Tsojmin Kreidoros (LE male dwarf wizard)
harbormaster and joint overseer of Port Peril

OTARI
N

2
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121889

SETTLEMENT 4

TOWN

Diverse lumber town and trade port with a storied past and a
fair share of sinister secrets.
Government Mayor (elected leader)
Population 1,240 (60% humans, 8% halflings, 7% half-elves,
6% elves, 5% dwarves, 5% gnomes, 3% half-orcs, 2% goblins,
4% other)
Languages Common, Dwarven, Elven, Gnomish, Halfling
Religions Cayden Cailean, Erastil, Gozreh, Nethys, Sarenrae
Threats aberrant horrors, eerie hauntings, kobolds, smugglers
Trinket Trade Otari has a long tradition of catering to
adventurers, and consumable items of up to level 10 can be
purchased in its markets ands shops.
Lardus Longsaddle (CN male human soldier) foul-mouthed and
short-tempered captain of the town guard
Oseph Menhemes (N male human mayor) current mayor of
Otari, patriarch of one of three local lumber companies
Vandy Banderdash (NG female halfling cleric) chatty priestess
of Sarenrae and unusually knowledgeable town historian
Wrin Sivinxi (CG female tiefling merchant) eccentric occult
items dealer, artisan, and collector of stories and rumors

135

18833943

4121890

4121890


Gamemastery Guide

THE PLANES

Beyond the world of Golarion and the void of space beyond it lie the vast planes of
existence referred to as the Great Beyond. Often alien and dangerous, most of these
planes embody some foundational aspect of reality—one of the chief elements that make
up the rest of the multiverse, a kind of fundamental energy, or an alignment. Each plane
is a reality unto itself, with its own laws of existence and its own native inhabitants who
might visit, grant benefits to residents of, or cause havoc on the face of Golarion.

Unbounded: Unbounded planes loop back on themselves
when a creature reaches the plane’s “edge.”

PLANAR TRAITS

GRAVITY TRAITS

Each plane, dimension, and demiplane has its own properties
and attributes. Planar traits can be broken down into six
categories: alignment, scope, gravity, time, morphic, and
planar essence. Combined, those traits describe the laws and
makeup of the plane. These appear in the plane’s traits entry,
though any trait that matches the Material Plane (described
in the Normal entry in each section below) is omitted.

ENHANCED AND IMPEDED MAGIC
Some planes enhance certain magic and impede opposing
effects. A plane that enhances a particular type of
magic grants anyone Casting a Spell with that trait a +1
circumstance bonus to their spell DC or spell attack roll
with that spell. Impeded magic means a character who Casts
a Spell or Activates an Item with the specified trait must
succeed at a DC 6 flat check or lose the spell or activation.

18833944

18833944

Exploring the planes offers several opportunities for high
adventure, as well chances to discover the secrets of creation.

ALIGNMENT TRAIT
Certain planes, particularly in the Outer Sphere, are attuned
to an alignment. Most inhabitants share that alignment—
even powerful creatures such as deities. Planes with the
neutral alignment trait are more often a mix of alignments
than strongly neutral, and planes with no alignment affinity
simply don’t have an alignment trait, rather than being
neutral. Alignments are given as an abbreviation (Pathfinder
Bestiary 345), which appears first in the plane’s list of traits.
Spells that share any of the plane’s alignment traits are
enhanced, and those with opposing traits are impeded. For
instance, in the chaotic evil Abyss, chaotic and evil spells are
enhanced, and lawful and good spells are impeded.

SCOPE TRAIT
Most planes are immeasurable, so immense they are
impossible to quantify. Which immeasurable planes, if any,
are infinite is a subject of debate among philosophers and
scholars alike. Since so many planes are immeasurable,
those planes omit a scope trait. Otherwise, the plane likely
has either the finite or unbounded trait.
Finite: Finite planes consist of a limited amount of space.
Immeasurable: Immeasurable planes are immeasurably
large, perhaps infinite.

Many planes have unusual gravity.
Normal: Bodies of great mass are the centers of gravity,
and objects fall toward those centers with a measured
amount of force relative to the size of the body.
High Gravity: As in normal gravity, bodies of great mass
act as centers of gravity, but the force relative to the size of
the body is greater than on the Material Plane. The Bulk
of all creatures and objects is doubled, meaning creatures
acclimated to normal gravity can carry only half as much.
Creatures used to normal gravity move at half Speed and can
jump only half as high and far. Physical ranged attacks are
impossible beyond the third range increment (instead of the
sixth). Creatures that fall in high gravity take bludgeoning
damage equal to the distance they fell.
Low Gravity: As in normal gravity, bodies of great mass
act as centers of gravity, but the force relative to the size
of the body is less than on the Material Plane. The Bulk
of all creatures and objects is halved, meaning creatures
acclimated to normal gravity can carry twice as much and
jump twice as high and far. Physical ranged attacks are
possible up to the twelfth range increment (instead of the
sixth). Creatures that fall in low gravity take no damage for
the first 10 feet of a fall, and then take bludgeoning damage
equal to a quarter of the remaining distance it fell.
Microgravity: There is little to no gravity on this plane.
Creatures float in space unless they can push off a surface or
use some force to propel themselves throughout the plane.
Strange Gravity: All bodies of mass are centers of gravity
with roughly the same force. A creature can stand on any
solid objects that is as large as or larger than themself.
Subjective Gravity: All bodies of mass can be centers
of gravity with the same force, but only if a non-mindless
creature wills it. Unattended items, objects, and mindless
creatures treat the plane as having microgravity. Creatures
on a plane with subjective gravity can move normally
along a solid surface by imagining “down” near their
feet. Designating this downward direction is a free action
that has the concentration trait. If suspended in midair,
a creature can replicate flight by choosing a “down”
direction and falling in that direction, moving up to their
Speed or fly Speed. This pseudo-flight uses the Fly action.

4121890

136

18833944

4121891

4121891

18833945

18833945


Tools

TIME TRAITS
Time flows differently on many planes.
Normal: Time passes the same way it does on the Material
Plane. One hour on a plane with normal time equals 1 hour
on the Material Plane.
Erratic: Time slows down and speeds up, so an individual
may lose or gain time as they move between planes. When a
creature moves from a plane with erratic time to one with
normal time, roll a DC 11 flat check. Creatures that leave
an erratic time plane together share the same result.
Success Time passed normally on the erratic time plane.
Failure For each hour spent on the erratic time plane, 1 day
passed on the normal time plane.
Critical Failure For each round spent on the erratic time plane,
1 day passed on the normal time plane.
Flowing: The flow of time is consistently faster or slower.
A creature may travel to one of these planes, spend a year
there, and find that only an hour passed on the Material
Plane; alternatively, they might spend a minute on this
plane and find out an hour passed on the Material Plane.
Timeless: Time still passes, but the effects of time are
diminished. Creatures on these planes don’t feel hunger,
thirst, or the effects of aging or natural healing. The effects
of poison, diseases, and other kinds of healing may also
be diminished on certain timeless planes. Spell energy and
other effects still dissipate, so the durations of spells and
other effects function as normal. The danger of this trait
is that when a creature leaves a timeless plane and enters a
plane with another time trait, the effects of hunger, thirst,
aging, and other effects slowed or arrested by the timeless
trait occur retroactively in the instant of transition, possibly
causing the creature to immediately starve or die of old age.

MORPHIC TRAITS
This trait describes how easily the physical nature of the
plane can be changed. The Material Plane is the norm, but
other planes can warp through the plane’s own sentient
designs or be manipulated by extremely powerful creatures.
Normal: Objects remain where they are (and what they
are) unless affected by physical force or magic. Creatures
can change the immediate environment as a result of
tangible effort, such as by digging a hole.
Metamorphic: Things change by means other than
physical force or magic. Sometimes spells have morphic
effects. Other times, the plane’s nature is under the control
of a deity or power, or the plane simply changes at random.
Sentient: The plane changes based on its own whims.
Static: Visitors can’t affect living residents of the plane or
objects the denizens carry in any way. Any spells that would
affect those on the plane have no effect unless the static trait
is somehow removed or suppressed.

PLANAR ESSENCE TRAITS
Planar essence traits describe a plane’s fundamental
nature. For example, many of the Inner Sphere’s planes are
infused with an element or energy, each of which affects

magic on those planes, and the Shadow Plane is awash
with shadow. Outer Planes are fundamentally made up
of quintessence, a philosophically aligned material with
infinite potential for shape and state that conforms to
powerful and prevailing beliefs.
Air: Planes with this trait consist mostly of open spaces
and air of various levels of turbulence, though they also
contain rare islands of floating stone and other elements and
energies. Air planes usually have breathable atmospheres,
though they may include clouds of acidic or toxic gas.
Air magic is enhanced, and earth magic is impeded. Earth
creatures often find themselves at a disadvantage within air
planes, which tend to at least make them uncomfortable, as
there is little solid ground for them to gain their bearings.
Earth: These planes are mostly solid. Travelers arriving
upon an earth plane risk suffocation if they don’t reach a
cavern or some other air pocket within the plane’s solid
matter. Creatures who can’t burrow are entombed in the
plane’s substance and must attempt to dig their way toward
an air pocket. Earth magic is enhanced, and air magic is
impeded. Air creatures are ill at ease, as they rarely have the
space to move freely through even the most lofty warrens.
Fire: Planes with this trait are composed of flames
that continually burn with no fuel source. Fire planes are
extremely hostile to non-fire creatures.
Unprotected wood, paper, cloth, and other flammable
materials catch fire almost immediately, and creatures
wearing unprotected flammable clothing catch fire, typically
taking 1d6 persistent fire damage. Extraplanar creatures
take moderate environmental fire damage at the end of
each round (sometimes minor environmental damage in
safer areas, or major or massive damage in even more fiery
areas). Fire magic is enhanced, and cold and water magic
are impeded. Water creatures are extremely uncomfortable
on a fire plane, and any natural resistance they have against
fire doesn’t function against this environmental fire damage.
Water: These planes are mostly liquid. Visitors who can’t
breathe water or reach an air pocket likely drown. Water
magic is enhanced, and fire magic is impeded. Creatures
with a weakness to water take damage equal to double
their weakness at the end of each round.
Negative: Planes with this trait are vast, empty reaches
that suck the life from the living. They tend to be lonely,
haunted planes, drained of color and filled with winds
carrying the moans of those who died within them. At the
end of each round, a living creature takes at least minor
negative environmental damage. In the strongest areas of
a negative plane, they could take moderate or even major
negative damage at the end of each round. This damage
has the death trait, and if a living creature is reduced to 0
Hit Points by this negative damage and killed, it crumbles
into ash and can become a wraith (Bestiary 335). Negative
magic is enhanced, and positive magic is impeded.
Positive: These planes are awash with life energy.
Colors are brighter, fires are hotter, noises are louder, and
sensations are more intense. At the end of each round, an

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121891

137

18833945

4121892

4121892


Gamemastery Guide

18833946

18833946

4121892

undead creature takes at least minor positive environmental
damage. In the strongest areas of a positive plane, they
could take moderate or even major positive damage at the
end of each round. While this might seem safe for living
creatures, positive planes present a different danger. Living
creatures regain an amount of HP each round equal to the
environmental damage undead take in the same area. If this
would bring the living creature above their maximum HP,
any excess becomes temporary HP. Unlike normal, these
temporary HP combine with each other, and they last until
the creature leaves the plane. If a creature’s temporary
HP from a positive plane ever exceeds its maximum
HP, it explodes in a burst of overloaded positive energy,
spreading across the area to birth new souls. Positive magic
is enhanced, and negative magic is impeded.
Shadow: Planes with this trait are umbral with murky
light. On a shadow plane, the radius of all light from light
sources and the areas of light spells are halved. Darkness and
shadow magic are enhanced, and light magic is impeded.

PLANAR STAT BLOCKS

Each of the planes listed in the following pages includes
a short stat block of key information. The plane’s type—
whether it is a plane, dimension, or demiplane—appears
in the stat block’s heading, followed by the traits that
define that plane. The following entries also provide
important information about each plane.

Category: This indicates whether the plane is an Inner
Plane, Outer Plane, Transitive Plane, or dimension.
Divinities: A list of all of the deities, demigods, and other
powers that call this realm their home.
Native Inhabitants: A sample of typical inhabitants of
the plane. Also listed are the plane’s petitioners, the souls
of dead mortals who have been judged and sent on to
whichever plane reflects the life they led. More information
on petitioners can be found in Pathfinder Bestiary 2.

INNER SPHERE PLANES
The planes of the Inner Sphere form the heart of the
cosmos. They are the home of mortal life, the focus of
divine attention, the source of mortal souls, and the origin
point of the great cycle of quintessence that fuels the
motions and stability of reality itself. Arranged in a nested
series of shells, like layers of an onion, the planes of the
Inner Sphere include, from outer to inner: the Elemental
Planes of Fire, Earth, Water, and Air; the universe of the
Material Plane; and at the very core of this cosmological
ensemble, the raw forces of creation and destruction of the
Positive and Negative Energy Planes.

MATERIAL PLANE

PLANE

N

Category Inner Plane
Divinities Elder Mythos pantheon, Gozreh

138

18833946

4121893

4121893

18833947

18833947


Tools

Native Inhabitants dwarves, elves, halflings, humans, gnomes,
goblins, and countless other ancestries
The Material Plane is the prosaic universe and the home
of mortal life. Innumerable galaxies play host to countless
stars and their planets, each housing unique settings for any
campaign, with Golarion as the classic example. Other worlds of
note like Castrovel, Akiton, and Eox exist within Golarion’s own
solar system, and then beyond this, orbiting other distant stars
or in other galaxies still, worlds such as Androffa, Carcosa, and
even Earth swirl within the Material Plane’s vast and silent void.
Yet for all the profound wonder and diversity of life that the
Material Plane houses, in the dark places between the stars,
known as the Dark Tapestry, lurk the inimical gods known
as the Outer Gods and Great Old Ones, the sinister collective
known as the Dominion of the Black.
The Material Plane serves as the destination for pre-incarnate
souls, each mortal life born, living, and dying before sending its
spirit toward the planes of the Outer Sphere for judgment. The
Material Plane is likewise the focus of the gods, each of whom is
invested in fostering their own particular portfolio among mortal
worshippers and the material world at large.

NEGATIVE ENERGY PLANE
N

NEGATIVE

SUBJECTIVE GRAVITY

PLANE
UNBOUNDED

Category Inner Plane
Divinities none
Native Inhabitants sceaduinars, wraiths, and other undead
The vast void of the Negative Energy Plane is a merciless, lightless
expanse of manifest destruction and nothingness. Sapping and
consuming the life force of any living creature exposed to its
energies, it corrodes and disintegrates material objects to rubble,
then dust, and then nothing at all. Yet the Void contains its own
form of anti-life. At their densest concentration, the plane’s
energies aggregate into bizarre, black crystalline snowflake
structures, and these irregularities spontaneously generate the
plane’s resident sceaduinars. Dwelling in beautiful, deadly cities
drifting in the vacuous darkness, these so-called void raptors are
incapable of true creation and blame this flaw on some ancient
betrayal by their rivals on the Positive Energy Plane. Sceaduinars
react violently not only toward creatures sustained by positive
energy, but also toward undead, whom they view as unnatural
parasites unworthy of their plane’s energies.
The black depths also swarm with undead, creatures doomed
to a mockery of life by the interaction of their souls with the
plane’s entropic energy. Yet for all the horrors posed by the
plane’s environment, inhabitants, and its undead victims, its
depths nevertheless hide rare refuges for planar travelers.
Malikar’s Keep offers shelter, for a price, to those willing to
bargain with its titular lich master, while elsewhere the depths
hide entire lost worlds such as Fallen Duromak, and deadly
mysteries like the planet-sized, undead‑entrapping glass
sphere, Eternity’s Doorstep.

POSITIVE ENERGY PLANE
N

POSITIVE

SUBJECTIVE GRAVITY

Category Inner Plane

PLANE
UNBOUNDED

Divinities none
Native Inhabitants jyoti, petitioners (enlightened)
Known as Creation’s Forge, the Positive Energy Plane is at once
the source of life-sustaining positive energy, the origin of all
pre-incarnate mortal souls, and paradoxically the most innately
hostile of all of the planes. While positive energy is deadly to
undead and beneficial to living beings, such is the intensity of
the plane that unmitigated exposure ultimately incinerates any
extraplanar beings without sufficient magical protection. The
most apt comparison for the plane’s interior is that of the heart
of a burning star, and indeed the stars of the Material Plane each
house natural portals to the Positive Energy Plane within their
glowing, potent cores to foster the movement of pre-incarnate
souls in their first steps in the great cycle of life and death.
Brilliant and blinding, the plane’s interior is sparsely populated,
and the resident phoenix-kin jyoti are intensely xenophobic.
Dwelling in glimmering, radiant crystalline cities such as
Arudrellisiir, they view themselves as gardeners and guardians
of souls spawned from their realm’s burning quintessence.
Intensely distrustful of gods and their servitors, jyoti can
nonetheless be bargained with, and they have frequently taken
into their custodianship any number of artifacts and imprisoned
beings considered too dangerous to house on any other plane.

PLANE OF AIR
N

AIR

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

PLANE

SUBJECTIVE GRAVITY

Category Inner Plane
Divinities elemental lords of air
Native Inhabitants air elementals, cloud dragons, djinn,
petitioners (air pneuma)
The Plane of Air, innermost of the Elemental Planes, is a vast
realm of wind, storms, and skies. Illuminated by great artificial
globes of flame and distant starlight from the material universe,
the plane is populated by air elementals, dragons, mephits, and
a great empire of djinn. Though mostly clouds and empty skies,
the plane is not entirely bereft of solid ground, including rock
and ice created by the residents or dragged into their realm from
the distant Plane of Earth or neighboring Plane of Water, and
bizarre, drifting spheres of brass and iron. While the former are
aggressively fought over, most housing the cities of the vast djinn
empire, the latter are almost entirely abandoned and shunned by
the plane’s inhabitants, who believe them cursed, entrapping
forgotten, ancient enemies who once ravaged the plane.
The djinn rule from their shining capital city of Armun Kelisk,
built atop a series of seven floating islands. Their vast trade
network crisscrosses the skies and ventures to other planes,
kept aloft by natural and magical flight, including great airships
that allow visitors to quickly and safely traverse the skies. The
djinn are welcoming and gracious hosts to extraplanar travelers
and adventurers, a perspective not shared by Hshurha the
Duchess of All Winds, the evil elemental lord of air.

PLANE OF EARTH
N

4121893

PLANE

EARTH

Category Inner Plane
Divinities elemental lords of earth, Nivi Rhombodazzle

139

18833947

4121894

4121894


Gamemastery Guide

Native Inhabitants crystal dragons, earth elementals, petitioners
(earth pneuma), shaitans
A great and rocky shell situated between the Plane of Fire and
Plane of Water, the Eternal Delve hosts a unique and varied
ecology of creatures at home in its rocky depths. Far from an
endless, solid expanse, the Plane of Earth is riddled with great
caverns and cave systems, excavated artificial vaults, vast
crystalline geodes, and underground oceans and springs of
magma where it borders its neighboring planes. Housing untold
riches in gemstones and veins of precious metals, the Plane of
Earth is an attractive setting for planar travelers seeking wealth
and willing to risk danger and the wrath of elementals, shaitans,
and other inhabitants who resent the plunder of their home.
While elementals have little organized society, the shaitan
genies’ Peerless Empire rules much of the plane from its capital,
the Opaline Vault—a rainbow-lit city within a 30-mile-wide geode
cavern. The shaitans have long been at war with the efreet
in the neighboring Plane of Fire, and while the earth genies
are less prone to slavery than their rivals, the shaitans brook
little dissent, and their rule can be harsh. They are downright
welcoming, however, compared to Ayrzul the Fossilized King,
the evil elemental lord of earth who rules a great expanse of rock
from his radiation-poisoned domain, the Blistering Labyrinth.

PLANE OF FIRE
N

Category Inner Plane
Divinities elemental lords of fire, Feronia
Native Inhabitants azers, efreet, fire elementals, magma
dragons, petitioners (fire pneuma)
Like a great, gleaming ball of flame situated at the heart of the
Astral Plane, the Plane of Fire is the outermost plane of the Inner
Sphere. A perpetual ocean of fire with skies of smoke, storms of
raining cinders, and lakes and rivers of magma flowing along its
border with the Elemental Plane of Earth, the plane is incredibly
hostile to those unprepared for its natural hazards. Yet it houses
one of the most well-known and traversed cities in all the planes:
the City of Brass, capital of the Dominion of Flame. Floating above
a sea of fire upon a great hemisphere of magical brass, the City of
Brass is a monument both to efreet cosmopolitan grandeur and
tyranny, the latter embodied by the grand sultana of the efreet.
Outside of the mercantile districts and the palaces and temples
of the fire genies, the city houses a vast enslaved underclass of
salamanders and others, including creatures from other planes.
The efreeti domain is not absolute, and elsewhere in the
plane are nations of fire mephits and the remains of an ancient
azer empire. While they don’t form any cohesive, organized
nations, the plane’s fire elementals are ruled over by the plane’s
most powerful entity, Ymeri the Queen of the Inferno, the evil
elemental lord of fire whose reign has gone unquestioned since
the imprisonment of her good-aligned rival Atreia eons ago.

18833948

18833948

PLANE

FIRE

PLANE OF WATER
N

SUBJECTIVE GRAVITY

PLANE
WATER

Category Inner Plane
Divinities elemental lords of water

Native Inhabitants brine dragons, marids, petitioners (water
pneuma), water elementals
Beyond the skies of the Plane of Air, the clouds grow darker
and condense into the vast, spherical, liquid shell of the Plane of
Water. Its nearly limitless stretches of saline, fresh, and brackish
seas teem with all manner of oceanic life, lit by light from the
border with the Plane of Air and descending into black, benthic
depths where it borders the Plane of Earth. While the plane is
perfectly amenable to water-breathing creatures, air-breathing
travelers must provide their own supply of air or magical means
to breathe. Bubbles of breathable atmosphere are relatively
rare and securely guarded, anchored over places of trade and
commerce with outsiders, such as the great city of Vialesk,
founded by immigrant undines. The plane’s oceans, dotted by
vast forests of kelp, magical currents, and strange phenomena,
play host to empires of merfolk, predatory and expansionist sea
devils, and the holdings of the plane’s great brine dragons.
While marids once claimed nearly absolute dominion over the
plane of their origin, their empire long ago fell into deterioration
and disunity. Their ravaged cities sank into the depths, and their
present-day holdings remain a shadow of their former grandeur.
Kelizandri the Brackish Emperor, the evil elemental lord of water
and cause of their ruin, rules the dark, saline depths, feasting
on all rivals and hoarding the vast, stolen wealth of the fallen
marid cities. Unlike other subjective gravity planes, on the Plane
of Water, a creature moves based on its swim Speed and must
use actions to Swim if it doesn’t have one.

4121894

TRANSITIVE PLANES
At a minimum, each Transitive Plane coexists with one or
more other planes, a relationship oversimplified by stating
that Transitive Planes are just used to get from one plane to
another. The mists of the Ethereal Plane overlap the planes
of the Inner Sphere, while the Astral Plane borders every
other plane in existence like the backstage of the cosmos.
Bright and dark mirrors of the Material Plane, the First
World and Shadow Plane overlap the mortal world, albeit
often in bizarre ways such that a short distance in one might
be a vast gulf in the other. The daring, wise, or desperate can
utilize these planes to bypass barriers in the Material Plane
or rapidly cross vast distances through much swifter travel.

ASTRAL PLANE
N

SUBJECTIVE GRAVITY

PLANE
TIMELESS

Category Transitive Plane
Divinities Alseta, Apsu
Native Inhabitants petitioners (untethered), shining children
The Silver Sea surrounds the planes of the Inner Sphere,
separating them from those of the Outer Sphere. The Astral Plane
provides the backdrop against which the River of Souls flows
from the Material Plane, ushering departed spirits toward final
judgment. Far from an empty void, the Astral’s silver substance
churns with currents and storms from the metaphysical heat
of the Plane of Fire, and where it touches the chaos of the
Maelstrom, the resulting eddies interact with the memories of
the dead to produce fleeting simulacra and even demiplanes.

140

18833948

4121895

4121895

18833949

18833949


Tools

2

The River of Souls draws the attention of soul-hunting
daemons and opportunistic night hags like sharks drawn to the
scent of blood. Led by psychopomps, a cross section of nearly
every type of celestial and monitor in existence, along with some
fiends, defends the proper flow of souls against such predators.
Running opposite the River of Souls is the flow of raw, unaligned
quintessence spun off from the so-called Antipode, channeled by
aeons back toward the Positive Energy Plane.
Travelers within the Astral find the plane untouched by
the passage of time, a property exploited by many mortals
fearing old age. Time, however, is not easily escaped, and upon
exiting the Astral Plane, a creature finds this debt catching up
to them, potentially aging to dust in moments.

constantly and unpredictably change. Distance and time are
wildly inconsistent, such that mortal travelers might spend an
hour or a day within the First World, only to find a century or
only a few seconds passed once they return to their own plane.
The First World stands outside the cycle of souls, something
the fey call the Great Abandonment, save for rare worshippers of
the Eldest whose souls incarnate here as fey. However, the plane’s
proximity to the Positive Energy Plane provides an environment
bursting with all manner of strange life and a general absence of
true death for its native fey unless they leave—as did gnomes.
Natural gates in wild places of the mortal realm connect to the
First World, which fey often use to visit the Material Plane or
ensnare mortals for their own capricious desires.

Variant Rules

ETHEREAL PLANE

SHADOW PLANE

NPC Gallery

N

PLANE

SUBJECTIVE GRAVITY

N

Category Transitive Plane
Divinities Alazhra
Native Inhabitants ether spiders, night hags, petitioners
(terrorized)
The Ethereal Plane is a vast, misty realm overlapping each of the
Inner Planes. Formed by the interacting tidal forces of creation
and destruction from the Positive and Negative Energy Planes,
this plane swirls with currents and eddies of fog, lit only by
erratic pulses of soft green luminescence and dimly visible light
of those planes it overlays, visible but ever intangible. While
mortals most often use the Ethereal as a means of transit, moving
by force of will in the absence of gravity to bypass barriers on
their own plane, the Ethereal hosts dangers and wonders, things
lost or abandoned in the mists, and things spun from local
eddies in the ethereal protomatter. Predatory monsters, ether
spiders, night hags and their goddess Alazhra, and all manner of
incorporeal undead roam the Space Between Spaces.
While travelers can easily become lost in the mists with little
to guide them, the plane does host some permanent structures,
drawing adventurers or dissuading them. One such location,
the House of the Itinerant Soul, houses wayward or lost
souls, offering visitors shelter and a way to avoid turning into
undead while avoiding the pull of the River of Souls. The grand
cathedral also serves as a focus for mortal planar travelers,
given its safety and the presence of friendly spirits willing to
serve as guides in the surrounding mists.

FIRST WORLD
N

ERRATIC

PLANE

METAMORPHIC

Category Transitive Plane
Divinities the Eldest
Native Inhabitants fey, linnorms
The First World was a first draft of the Material Plane, crafted
by divinities to test their metaphorical crafting materials and
palettes of colors before setting it aside to create a second, final
version of their work. A realm of extremes—savage, primal, and
beautiful—with colors and sensations brighter and more intense
than the mundane world created after it, the First World is
populated by fey and the divine entities known as the Eldest.
Mirroring mercurial fey whimsy, the First World’s laws of nature

PLANE

introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems

SHADOW

Category Transitive Plane
Divinities velstrac demagogues, Zon-Kuthon
Native Inhabitants caligni, d’ziriaks, kayals (fetchlings),
petitioners (the mutilated), umbral dragons, velstracs
A murky, distorted, and imperfect mirror of the Material Plane,
the Shadow Plane overlaps the Material Plane and serves as a
buffer or conduit between it and the Negative Energy Plane. The
Shadow Plane exists in a state of perpetually dim half-light, the
landscape containing similar features to the overlapping Material
Plane, but in warped or twisted fashions. Cities on the Material
Plane might exist on the Shadow Plane, sometimes in ruins and
sometimes as terrible, frightening replicas. The darkness also
holds points of beauty and relative safety, such as the great city
of Shadow Absalom. The bleak doppelganger of Golarion’s own
Absalom hosts cross-planar trade facilitated by a permanent,
one-way portal out of the gloom.
The Shadow Plane is populated by dark, altered versions of
creatures from the Material Plane, many of them immigrants that
have adapted to the shadow after being trapped in the realm for
generations. The shadow natives known as kayals—also known as
fetchlings—were originally humans before thousands of years of
exposure to the Shadow Plane and breeding with strange beings
forever altered them. Velstracs, who long ago fled from Hell, have
since adopted the Shadow Plane as their home, spreading their
horrific message of perfection through mutilation in service to
their victim and patron, the god Zon-Kuthon. In contrast, d’ziriaks
originated within the Shadow Plane itself, as have the fearsome
umbral dragons ruling self-crafted fiefdoms within the shadows.
Greatest of these is Argrinyxia, who rules over Shadow Absalom.

GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121895

OUTER SPHERE PLANES
The planes of the Outer Sphere are the manifest realms
of alignment: chaos, evil, good, law, neutrality, and their
admixtures, populated by celestials, fiends, monitors, and
others who promote these moral concepts. These planes are
the backdrop upon which the mortal afterlife reaches its
apparent conclusion, and the end destination of the River
of Souls. The Outer Planes are regions of stability adrift in
the raw, chaotic quintessence of the primordial Maelstrom,
its tides forever gnawing at their edges even as mortal souls

141

18833949

4121896

4121896


Gamemastery Guide

sustain them. The Abyss manifests as cracks in the Outer
Sphere’s fabric, while rising from the metropolitan Axis is
the Boneyard’s spire, the location where mortal souls are
judged and then sent to their final destinations, be they
reward, suffering, or oblivion. The Outer Planes are places
of majesty, wonder, terror, and danger outstripping anything
mortal adventurers might encounter anywhere else.

ABADDON

Category Outer Plane
Divinities Ahriman, daemon harbingers, Fumeiyoshi, Horsemen
of the Apocalypse, Lao Shu Po, Urgathoa, Zyphus
Native Inhabitants daemons, night hags, nightmares, petitioners
(the hunted)
A perpetual eclipse looms above the bleak wastelands of
Abaddon, shedding an eerie half-light over a landscape of toxic,
disease-ridden swamps, volcanic wastes, fog-shrouded forests,
and the glittering, memory-devouring ribbon of the River Styx.
An unnatural silence blankets the plane, cut only by the wails
of petitioners falling from the sky like screaming, falling stars,
or those already condemned upon the ground, desperate to find
safety that doesn’t exist. Daemons, the physical embodiments
of death and oblivion, roam unchecked, owing allegiance only to
the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse: Death, Famine, Pestilence,
and War. In the courts of the Horsemen and the neutral grounds
of trade cities such as Awaiting-Consumption, the soul trade
serves daemonic hunger and industrialized oblivion. Night
hags and other creatures ply the trade or make their way along
the margins of daemonic society, eager to avoid consumption
themselves by the plane’s nihilistic masters. Urgathoa and
Zyphus claim divine domains here, their petitioners granted
freedom from predation. Yet something far worse glares down
upon these gods and the Horseman alike. Abaddon’s perpetual
eclipse may be nothing less than the lidded, comatose eye of the
Bound Prince, the First Horseman, betrayed and cast down by
the Four, forgotten by the cosmos at large, but far too powerful
for them to destroy—waiting, watching, and hungering.

18833950

18833950

PLANE

NE

ABYSS

PLANE

CE

great planar rift, the denizens of the Abyss are fractured and
self-destructive. Demon lords such as Dagon, Pazuzu, and Zura,
and even gods including the ascended demon lord Lamashtu, the
Mother of Monsters, fight for dominion over the Abyss as much
or more than they threaten the other planes. Though dangerous,
not every realm of the Abyss is immediately hostile to the
prepared traveler. Shamira’s city of Alushinyrra in the Midnight
Isles and Abraxas’s library-city of Diovengia in the realm of
Pleroma are each welcoming in their own dark ways. Even those
who survive a journey through the Abyss, however, inevitably
must resist being deeply corrupted by the experience.

AXIS

Category Outer Plane
Divinities Abadar, Brigh, Chaldira, halfling pantheon, Irori,
Lissala, Milani, Norgorber, primeval inevitables
Native Inhabitants aeons, inevitables, petitioners (remade)
Axis is a realm of pure, absolute law, unhindered by the
moral concerns of good or evil. The plane takes the form of
a vast, gleaming, perfectly structured city. Built at the base
of Pharasma’s Spire, the Perfect City is a bulwark against
the chaos of the Maelstrom and Abyss, with vast mechanical
armies of inevitables marching forth to explore, define, and
pacify an imperfect, unruly universe. Axis is also home
to axiomites: beings composed of living mathematics and
equations who helped create the first inevitables. Axiomites
continue to work on the maintenance of the inevitables, but
increasingly turn their attentions to the planar city of Axis
itself; as with any city, Axis requires non-stop maintenance
and improvement in order to resist the march of time.
Axis’s natives are far from the only inhabitants of their
cosmopolitan realm. Devils and archons often visit along with
petitioners, mortal travelers, and smaller numbers of most every
other kind of extraplanar being. Abadar and other lawful deities
make their homes here. The empty, former domain of Aroden
languishes here, while below the streets lies Norgorber’s domain,
a labyrinthine undercity.

BONEYARD
N

Category Outer Plane
Divinities Camazotz, demon lords, Droskar, Ghlaunder, goblin
hero-gods, Gyronna, Lady Nanbyo, Lamashtu, nascent demon
lords, qlippoth lords
Native Inhabitants demons, petitioners (larvae), qlippoth
Like a corrosive rot in the roots of the Outer Sphere, or an
antithetical, rival reality run aground into the Maelstrom at the
dawn of time, the Abyss is a place of horror and destruction
fed by mortal sin. Each of its innumerable regions is a unique
iteration of chaos and evil, each with its own terrible and twisted
environment, with one driving maxim: the strong survive, while
the weak suffer and are destroyed. Ruled by demons, and before
them by the alien, nightmarish qlippoth, the Abyss and its native
beings seek only to ravage and destroy. While demons routinely
rampage out into other planes when the Abyss manifests a

PLANE

LN

4121896

PLANE

TIMELESS

Category Outer Plane
Divinities Achaekek, Groetus, psychopomp ushers, Pharasma
Native Inhabitants petitioners (the dead), psychopomps,
The Boneyard spans an impossibly tall and ever‑growing spire
of gleaming quintessence that rises up into the silver void
of the Astral Plane. As the destination of the River of Souls,
the Boneyard is where the souls of the mortal dead arrive for
judgment and for Pharasma and her psychopomp servitors to
direct them to their respective afterlives. Pharasma’s domain is
separated into eight courts, each corresponding to one of the
other planes of the Outer Sphere and collecting the souls due
to that plane. Not every soul goes unchallenged, and proxies
of gods and planes argue and debate over souls, with final
arbitration conducted by Pharasma herself.
While Pharasma rules absolutely within the Boneyard,

142

18833950

4121897

4121897


Tools

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18833951

18833951

4121897

she is not the only divinity there. The demigod psychopomp
ushers dwell within the plane in service to her, and the deity
Achaekek dwells below at the spire’s root. Looming high above
as a skull-faced moon waits Groetus, the god of the end times,
his orbit slowly decaying in minuscule iterations supposedly
counting down to the last days of the cosmos.
Pharasma’s courts and the surrounding Graveyard of Souls are
not the only features atop the spire. Beyond the graveyard, the
Spirelands manifest environments much like those of the varied
Material Plane worlds, filled with the souls of neutral petitioners
who have nowhere else to go as they are unclaimed by any gods
and unaligned with any particular ethos.

appear as idealized versions of their mortal selves, each pursuing
their own self-determined actions and finding their own unique
paths to join the ranks of the plane’s celestials.
Azatas—the plane’s primary denizens—organize into fleeting,
competitive courts, each rewarding heroism and creativity above
all else. Elysium hosts a number of resident deities, including
Calistria and the elven pantheon, Cayden Cailean, Desna, Gorum,
and various empyreal lords. Visitors from across the planes are
drawn to Elysium’s Wandering City of Emerald Song, a mobile,
impermanent, and ever-changing city of lillend azatas organized
by their princess, Anduarine the Muse, filled with art, craft,
revelry, song, and trade.

ELYSIUM

HEAVEN

PLANE

CG

PLANE

LG

Category Outer Plane
Divinities Calistria, Cayden Cailean, Desna, elven pantheon,
empyreal lords, Gorum, giant pantheon, Kofusachi,
Milani, Nocticula
Native Inhabitants azatas, petitioners (the chosen)
Verdant, wild, and unrestrained by law, where passion and
creation are fostered and rewarded, the plane of Elysium is a
place of wild, idealized natural beauty. The so-called Promised
Land and its inhabitants represent a wide variety of freely given
benevolence, often willing to directly aid visitors but more often
serving as inspirations and muses to foster positive change and
self-realized success. Elysium’s petitioners, known as the chosen,

Category Outer Plane
Divinities dwarven pantheon, Easivra, empyreal lords, Erastil,
Iomedae, Shizuru, Torag, Tsukiyo
Native Inhabitants archons, petitioners (the elect)
The great mountain of Heaven is the realm of structured
benevolence made manifest. Organized into seven tiers, the
mountain’s solid appearance is actually malleable, making way
for a vast assemblage of varied environments to accommodate
both its own celestials and the souls who migrate there. Devoted
to defending the innocent and crusading against the wicked,
Heaven’s archons marshal into vast armies, commanded by their
own empyreal lords. Angels collaborate with the archon legions

143

18833951

4121898

4121898


Gamemastery Guide

but typically act in more direct service to Heaven’s resident
deities, with Iomedae, Erastil, and Torag the most prominent
among them.
Petitioners known as the elect manifest at the mountain’s
base, and their subsequent climb up the seemingly endless,
unreachable heights is both a literal and figurative journey.
Progress is about personal growth and spiritual purification
as the petitioners grow more and more attuned to the plane.
Likewise, progress from one layer to the next is often impossible
without permission from the archons or spiritual alignment with
Heaven itself. Most visitors arrive at the city of Heaven’s Shore, a
place open to both traders and to pilgrims of good intent. Access
beyond its heavily guarded walls is difficult, to say nothing of
scaling the mountain. At its pinnacle is the Garden, Heaven’s
ultimate layer. Unattended and empty, the Garden is a beautiful,
transcendent mystery even to its resident deities, and the source
of the plane’s call of self-perfection to its petitioners.

HELL

Category Outer Plane
Divinities archdevils, Asmodeus, Dahak, Erecura, General
Susumu, infernal dukes, Minderhal, Yaezhing, Zursvaater,
queens of the night
Native Inhabitants devils, hellhounds, petitioners (the damned)
Hell is the realm of devils, the multiversal seat of tyranny and
malignant law, and the divine domain of Asmodeus, the Prince
of Darkness. Here every act is authorized, calculated, recorded,
and set like perfectly ordered clockwork within a vast machine
driven on methodical suffering and greased with pain and
purification. The nine inverted layers of Hell violently oppose the
surrounding fabric of the Maelstrom, each layer shaped to reflect
the nature of its ruling archdevil. Avernus’s volcanic wastes,
ruled by Barbatos, are the marshaling place of Hell’s armies,
and where newly damned souls are shackled and shuffled off
to their assigned torment. Dispater’s layer of Dis is a great iron
city: brutal, beautiful, and terrible. The layer of Erebus comprises
both the sewers of Dis and the vaults and treasuries of Hell,
ruled by Mammon, a great genius loci embodied by the very
wealth locked within Hell’s coffers. Ruled by Belial, the layer of
Phlegethon hosts Hell’s forges, while Geryon’s watery realm of
Stygia houses Hell’s libraries. Moloch’s smoldering, ash-draped
forest realm of Malebolge is the training site of the infernal
armies, and Baalzebul’s frozen layer of Cocytus torments the
imprisoned, starving damned. Mephistopheles rules the layer of
Caina, a realm of cages and torture suspended above a pit of
hungry darkness, while at the very bottom of Hell’s infinite pit,
Asmodeus rules unquestioned from his throne in Nessus.

18833952

18833952

PLANE

LE

MAELSTROM

PLANE

CN METAMORPHIC

Category Outer Plane
Divinities Besmara, Hanspur, Hei Feng, Naderi, Nalinivati,
Nethys, orc pantheon, protean lords, Sivanah, Speakers of the
Depths, Sun Wukong, Yamatsumi, Ydersius
Native Inhabitants proteans, petitioners (the shapeless)

The Maelstrom, infinite and ancient, spawned the other Outer
Planes in cosmological prehistory and surrounds them like a
vast metaphorical—and at times literal—ocean of raw, chaotic
quintessence. Where the Maelstrom borders these other
planes, its structure takes on their characteristics, albeit in
an unpredictable, chaotic fashion. Beyond these so-called
Borderlands, however, the Maelstrom reverts to its true nature,
the Cerulean Void: a trackless, liquid infinity devoid of stability
and permanence where serpentine proteans create and destroy
with profound frivolity. The proteans are paradoxically organized
into discrete choruses, each with its own philosophy and goals
in service to the Maelstrom. Swirling with oddities and wild
magic, bereft of laws and structure, the Maelstrom also serves
as a conduit between the other Outer Planes utilized by armies
of extraplanar beings, hordes of demons spilling forth from the
Abyss, and the innumerable protean choruses seeking to return
the rest of the planes to the true freedom of the chaos from
which they emerged. Sufficiently powerful magic can stabilize
the chaos for a time, allowing for the creation of demiplanes and
stable islands. The massive planar trade city of Galisemni is most
prominent among these, drifting through the chaos.

NIRVANA

PLANE

NG

Category Outer Plane
Divinities Daikitsu, empyreal lords, Gruhastha, Kazutal,
Kurgess, Qi Zhong, Sarenrae, Shelyn
Native Inhabitants angels, petitioners (the cleansed)
The pastoral paradise of Nirvana is the realm of purest good, a
plane that promises sanctuary to the weary and enlightenment
and transcendence to those who seek it out. Filled with beautiful
wilderness of all types in perfect harmony with its occupants,
Nirvana’s wilds are home to angels and others. The plane’s
petitioners, known as the cleansed, most often take the forms
of glorified, sapient wild animals, though many eventually leave
their carefree existence to aid others, ascending to assist the
benevolent works of angels. Devoted to guiding and assisting
mortals, angels are often charged with delivering important
messages that reflect the will of benevolent deities.
Various divinities make their home amid Nirvana’s wilds,
including a host of empyreal lords and, most prominently,
Sarenrae and Shelyn. While the great cities of High Ninshabur
and Llourith welcome visitors, most mortals visiting Nirvana
witness the plane’s beauty and supernatural feeling of peace
but rarely encounter many of its residents, as the plane itself
protectively hides much of its contents from any but the most
selfless and pure of heart. The plane’s hinterlands hint at hidden
mysteries, including legends that the plane shelters the vanished
heroes of innumerable mortal worlds, peacefully sleeping until
their peoples’ times of greatest need.

4121898

DIMENSIONS
Existing in the metaphorical space between the Transitive
Planes and smaller, finite demiplanes, dimensions are a
category unto themselves, defying the neat categorization
of planar scholars and adventurers. Seemingly infinite in

144

18833952

4121899

4121899

18833953

18833953


Tools

scale, not necessarily spatial in the same way as a plane,
and overlaying every other plane at once—including one
another—dimensions and planes are most significantly
differentiated in how each of them breaks the commonly
held rules of the other. Although some scholars include
other extraplanar realms within the ranks of dimensions,
only two such realms are uniformly agreed upon and
classified as such. The Dreamlands, also known as the
Dimension of Dreams, is readily accessed by mortal
dreamers, while the Dimension of Time is notorious
for the near impossibility of accessing it as well as the
bizarre, often deadly restrictions upon travel to and
within its bounds.

DIMENSION OF TIME
N

ERRATIC

DIMENSION

STATIC

Category dimension
Divinities Tawil at’Umr, Yog-Sothoth
Native Inhabitants hounds of Tindalos, petitioners (the unbound)
Among the most obscure planes of existence, the Dimension
of Time is virtually impossible to access by conventional
methods of planar travel. Instead, travelers much perform
complex and difficult rituals described within the pages of
such monstrously rare tomes as the Necronomicon and the
Book of Serpents, Ash, and Acorns: Shadows of What Was and
Will Be. Compounding the plane’s obscurity, each traveler’s
experience seems to be unique, and most who attempt the
journey never return. Every manner of magic that interacts
with the plane invariably draws the attention of creatures such
as the hounds of Tindalos. The proper flow and continuity of
time seems to self-correct for any attempted meddling, often
with violence.
Those few who have gained entry and returned describe the
plane as a swirling storm of blurred images, the composite of
millions of interwoven timelines around their own, with a single
doorway allowing access to one’s own past. Travelers appear as
transparent images of themselves, but the plane seems averse
to any attempt to alter the past, no matter the means or the
intention. Such attempts often end in the offending individual
erased from existence or trapped within closed time loops to
limit the damage they inflict upon the overall flow of time.
Supposedly, like an eye in a storm, at the dimension’s heart is
the legendary realm of Stethelos and its terrible occupant Tawil
at’Umr. Tales of this realm speak only of a great city, a vast green
meadow, and the rushing sound of an ocean emptying over an
immense and terrible waterfall.

DREAMLANDS
N

DIMENSION

FLOWING

Category dimension
Divinities Elder Mythos pantheon
Native Inhabitants animate dreams, Denizens of Leng, Leng
spiders, petitioners (dreamers)
Created and sustained by the collective dreams of sleeping
mortals, the Dreamlands (also called the Dimension of Dreams)
overlays the Ethereal Plane. When a creature dreams, regardless

of the location of their physical body, they interact directly
with the Dreamlands. Sleeping creatures cast themselves
into the plane in idealized avatars known as lucid bodies, and
their dreamscapes are immune to outside entry by standard
magic such as plane shift, requiring obscure, more specialized
spells to access. The dreamers of each mortal world generate
a cluster of dreamscapes, like drifting bubbles atop a deeper
ocean of permanent dreams formed from the collective mass of
slumbering desires, dreams of especially powerful dreamers, and
the dreams of ancient, obscure entities—including the gods of
the Elder Mythos. While most dreamscapes are safe, travelers
in the deep, permanent Dreamlands face living, animate dreams
and the predation of night hags from the Ethereal Plane, as well
as stranger beings spawned within the core itself.
Some scholars postulate a distinct region within the dimension
for nightmares, much as the more stable inner portions of the
dimension exist separately from the transient, ever-forming and
evaporating mortal dreamscapes at its edges. Others conflate
this nightmare region with the demiplane of Leng, while still
others dismiss this notion but speculate that Leng is somehow
accessible to dreamers who intentionally seek it out.

2
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

DEMIPLANES

Demiplanes are much smaller and more limited than
planes or dimensions, and they come into being more
easily. They may arise naturally where the raw chaos
of the Maelstrom churns at the border of the Astral,
crystallize around shed memories of dead mortals on
their way to judgment, or coalesce within the mists of
the Ethereal set into motion by the forces of the Positive
and Negative Energy Planes. They can also be crafted by
will and powerful magic to suit their designers’ whims.
Almost innumerable, each is distinctly finite, with their
own nature and rules set at their creation.
Desna’s demiplanar realm of Cynosure exists as
Golarion’s literal north star, silently visible in the night skies,
hosting her servitors and petitioners in her divine realm at
its heart. Other demiplanes are crafted by mortals, such as
the Refuge of Nex, created by the titular archmage seeking
respite and solitude, and the Hao-Jin Tapestry, a demiplane
stocked with its creator’s collection and accessed through a
literal tapestry artifact she fashioned as its entrance.
Created not by gods or mortals, the Akashic Record is
a demiplane thought to exist deep within the Astral as a
repository of the collective knowledge and memories of the
cosmos, secure and unchanging, but so difficult to access
that most doubt its very existence. Other demiplanes serve
darker purposes and are perhaps best left forgotten, though
their mysteries often tempt the ignorant, the foolish, and
the desperate. The Prison of the Laughing Fiend serves
to bottle its enigmatic and godlike occupant, Tegresin
the Laughing Fiend, bound by nameless divinities whose
nature and reason changes with each telling of the story,
while the Dead Vault was crafted at Golarion’s core by
the gods themselves to forever bottle Rovagug the Rough
Beast, lest he escape and devour all existence.

4121899

145

18833953

4121900

4121900


Gamemastery Guide

18833954

18833954

4121900

146

18833954

4121901

4121901

18833955

18833955


Subsystems

CHAPTER 3: SUBSYSTEMS

When your game goes into uncharted territory or you want to emphasize an element of
gameplay that usually gets overlooked or condensed into a single check, you can use a
subsystem. As the name implies, subsystems are extensions of the main rules system that
allow you to explore a particular topic or style of play at your table.

3
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools

Subsystems are a great way to add depth to aspects of your game that don’t occur in
combat but still have high stakes. This chapter begins with Victory Points, a structure
that underlies much of the chapter, to help you build your own subsystems. Next are
some of the most common subsystems you might need in your game, with advice on
how to use and modify them. This chapter is organized into the following sections.
• Victory Points (page 148) provides you a framework with which to build
your own subsystems, detailing the fundamental structure that Pathfinder
uses for its subsystems.
• Influence (page 151) gives rules for more in-depth social encounters involving
influencing NPCs.
• Research (page 154) shows you how to build an interesting structure for
scenes where PCs research information.
• Chases (page 156) are designed to represent the fast-paced feel of movie
chase scenes.
• Infiltration (page 160) allows you to build infiltrations and heists where
careful planning helps the PCs maintain an edge against their adversaries
and pull off incredible capers.
• Reputation (page 164) breathes life into the world around the PCs, as various
groups of NPCs react favorably or unfavorably to the PCs actions, and PCs’
status with those groups changes.
• Duels (page 166) provides a simple architecture for one-on-one showdowns
between adversaries.
• Leadership (page 168) allows PCs to attract people to a cause, giving them
cohorts and organizations to look after.
• Hexploration (page 170) teaches you how to build exploration maps on
a hexagonal grid to give your PCs the thrill of discovering secrets within
uncharted or unfamiliar territory.
• Vehicles (page 174) allows you to run encounters involving vehicles and capitalize
on their potential to help PCs explore on a larger scale and at a faster pace.

COMBINING SUBSYSTEMS
Some of the subsystems in
this chapter could interact in
interesting ways when combined.
For instance, the influence
subsystem could be part of how
you build up reputation, or a piece
of the plan in an infiltration. Or
you could have a hexploration
chase with a rival adventuring
group, encountering obstacles
in each hex as you race for the
prize—while using vehicles to
travel faster! Ultimately, it’s up to
you to decide how two combined
subsystems should interact to
tell your group’s particular story,
though a good rule of thumb is
to have a backdrop subsystem
that you’re tracking on a longer
term to which the shorter-term
subsystem contributes.

Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121901

DECIDING TO USE A SUBSYSTEM

When you have an exciting subsystem available, it can be tempting to use it anytime
it can possibly come up (for instance, replacing every social scene with the influence
subsystem). However, subsystems are most effective when used with intention.
Subsystems are best when used for a component of the game that’s meant to be at least
a significant portion of a single session. Think about whether you want a different
style of play than normal before you decide to use a subsystem, since that’s what
subsystems are best suited for. You should avoid using a particular subsystem if many
members of your group don’t like it, or if use of a subsystem during play devolves into
the PCs making a series of rolls that don’t contribute to telling an interesting story.
It’s important to leave enough time and mental energy to make the subsystem
feel special and to bring all the components and elements of the subsystem to life
in the game world. A subsystem stripped of all its life and story depth can become
nothing more than a large number of die rolls, and the last thing you want is to lose
the magic, especially with a subsystem the PCs enjoy. Sometimes, a simple check
is the right way to handle the scene, and that’s okay! The subsystems will be there
when you need them to spice up an adventure or really dive deep into a particular
element or scene.

147

18833955

4121902

4121902


Gamemastery Guide

VICTORY POINTS

You’ll often find that your games could use a way to track progress toward a goal so
that you don’t have to just keep everything in your head. This section explains how to
build your own subsystems for tracking success via Victory Points. Many other subsystems
throughout the chapter use these as well, though often by a different name.
Victory Points (or VP) are a powerful tool in your GM
arsenal, as they allow you to track the PCs’ progress
using a subsystem to go beyond the results of a single
check. Victory Points are versatile; you could track and
resolve them within a single encounter, or you could
collect them over the course of an entire campaign to
determine the ending of the story.

NAMING YOUR VICTORY
POINTS

It can be fun to rename your Victory Points,
to better reflect the subsystem they track.
The term “Victory Points” is
unspecific, so you can create
a name for your Victory
Points that fits the theme
of your adventure and helps
the players feel more like they
are taking part in the type
of activity your subsystem
represents. Examples of renamed
VPs include Influence Points (page 151),
Infiltration Points (page 160), Research
Points (page 154), and Reputation Points
(page 164). The name should be representative, and
the PCs should understand what it refers to. You can leave
off the word “Points” if you prefer, though this section often
retains it while describing how Victory Points can be used.

18833956

18833956

VICTORY POINT
SUBSYSTEM
STRUCTURES

There are a few common structures for tracking Victory
Points that you might use for your new subsystem.
You could come up with a structure based off one of
the subsystems below, or you could create your own
completely different structure if none of them match
the way you’re running your game. The most important
thing is to consider how the PCs or their opposition gain
or lose various forms of Victory Points.

structure in action: each PC has a certain number of
chances to influence various NPCs, and after reaching a
particular threshold of Victory Points with an NPC, the
PCs have convinced that NPC.
In a variation of this structure, the PCs’ adversaries
can also accumulate Victory Points, giving the PCs
a moving target—either to reach the goal before the
adversary or to have more Victory Points than the
adversary at the end of a given time frame. This is
a great structure for you to use in a situation where
the PCs face opposition rather than having the
PCs accumulate Victory Points while
adversaries decrease the total, since it’s
dynamic and less at risk of resulting
in a stalemate.
You can track a subsystem at a
larger scale, like over the course
of an adventure or campaign,
by granting the PCs Victory
Points for achieving difficult
goals or making particular
decisions.
Such
subsystems
usually ask the PCs to compare their
accumulated Victory Points against
several ranked tiers that each having
varying results on the story. Typically these results
become more positive for the PCs as they acquire more
Victory Points, but sometimes succeeding too fully
could have unintended consequences, like convincing
the workers to support a rebellion so thoroughly that it
riles up a mob. If you’re making your own subsystem,
you might not define these ranks in full, but just use
your best guess at the end.

4121902

Accumulating Rolls

ACCUMULATING VICTORY POINTS

In cases where the PCs need to make checks to gain
Victory Points, the amount they get for the degrees of
success is up to you. The default scale detailed below
works in most cases.
Critical Success The PCs gain 2 Victory Points.
Success The PCs gain 1 Victory Point.
Critical Failure The PCs lose 1 Victory Point.

The most common structure is to accumulate Victory
Points toward a total, either stopping after reaching a
success threshold or collecting as many Victory Points
as possible in a given time frame and then measuring
the results against various thresholds. The influence
subsystem on page 151 is a great example of this

This means that the result of a PC’s check usually
results in the party gaining either 1 or no Victory Points.
However, specialized PCs have a solid chance of earning
the party 2 Victory Points, and hare‑brained schemes
have a fair chance of losing the PCs 1 Victory Point.

148

18833956

4121903

4121903


Subsystems

DIMINISHING VICTORY POINTS
Using this method, the PCs start with a certain number
of Victory Points, and rather than accumulating them,
they attempt to avoid losing them. Perhaps the PCs
are trying to keep dragon eggs from cracking, or are
otherwise attempting to minimize damage, loss, or
danger. This variant is less common, but it’s great at
conveying the urgency of a situation as the PCs lose
points. Sometimes it’s necessary to add that sense of
tension with this subsystem! Typically, when the PCs
lose all their Victory Points, a negative event occurs.
If they’re on a timer, the final results might be better
the more points they manage to keep before the time
runs out.

Diminishing Rolls
Using this structure, the PCs typically lose Victory
Points as a result of failed checks, though they can still
lose them for making particularly poor decisions or
behaving recklessly. Once again, you can use any scaling
consequences that make sense, but the default degrees of
success are as follows.
Critical Success If regaining ground is possible, the PCs gain 1
Victory Point. Otherwise, as success.
Success The PCs avoid losing any Victory Points.
Failure The PCs lose 1 Victory Point.
Critical Failure The PCs lose 2 Victory Points.

ENEMY VICTORY POINTS
In addition to giving both the PCs and enemies Victory
Points, as mentioned on page 149, sometimes it makes
more sense to have only the enemies gain or lose Victory
Points instead of the PCs. Even though the NPCs are also
taking actions, it’s usually best to increase or reduce the
enemy’s Victory Points based on just the PCs’ actions,
since it maximizes the feeling of player agency. In some
rare cases where the foes act directly against the PCs,
you might have both PC and foe actions increase the foe’s
Victory Points.
Implementing such a subsystem might mean flipping the
normal rolls. For instance, if the PCs were trying to lower
their enemies’ Influence over a faction, a critical success
by a PC would lower the Influence by 2, a success would
lower the Influence by 1, and a critical failure might give
the enemies something to exploit, raising their Influence by
1. This uses the same effects as an accumulating roll, but
“damages” the enemies’ VP instead of gaining VP for the
PCs’ side. While this is very similar mechanically to the PCs
gaining VP, the thematic connection is much stronger for an
intrigue-based story.

3
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

overcoming them grant more VP. PCs who do their
research or come up with clever strategies should find it
easier to overcome the challenge.

18833957

18833957

4121903

MULTIPLE POINT SUBSYSTEMS
In a multiple point subsystem, you have more than
one point system, each measuring something different.
For example, in a long-distance race, the PCs and their
opponents both try to gain their own Marathon Points,
and whoever gets to 10 points first wins!
Infiltration on page 160 offers a different example of
a Victory Point subsystem with multiple types of points.
PCs try to get a certain number of Infiltration Points to
successfully infiltrate a location while avoiding giving
Awareness Points to their enemies through failure.
Consider combining the multiple points with a time
factor, like in infiltrations, where the PCs automatically
accrue Awareness Points over time at a slow rate.

OBSTACLES AND DCS

When preparing your subsystem, think of the obstacles
PCs might face or avenues they can exploit when
engaging in your subsystem. Set some DCs for them
in advance, using the normal system for setting DCs.
Everything else, you can improvise on the spot. If you
think your DCs will be higher overall, when you set the
number of points needed, choose a value on the lower
end (see Setting your Scale below).
Think of some possibilities that are much easier and
some that are harder. Who are your PCs opposing,
and what weak points might that opposition have that
the PCs could exploit? Set those DCs lower or make

SETTING YOUR SCALE

The number of points it takes to reach a goal will greatly
affect how your subsystem feels during play. If you want
the subsystem to be used for a single scene, such as one
negotiation with a powerful NPC, set the number lower
than if it’s meant to take up most or all of a game session.
The Table 3–1 (page 150) suggests possible values for
your Victory Point scale. The “adventure-wide” scale is
for subsystems that are part of a larger narrative, granting
Victory Points when the PCs overcome entire encounters or
dungeons, rather than as an encounter unfolds.
This larger scale is intended for subsystems that take
a lot of the party’s focus. A subsystem that runs in the
background during an adventure should use a smaller
scale. This is usually the “adventure-wide, sideline” value.
It could be even lower, such as if you have a dungeon-based
adventure including several opportunities to interact with
a kobold tribe to get some small benefits. Though they
appear throughout the adventure, you would use a lower
value because attaining the VP is a minor part of the story.
In fact, you might choose not to use a VP subsystem at all.
The table also lists numbers for one or more
thresholds. These are the point values at which the PCs
get a partial benefit (or, for a diminishing subsystem,
take a drawback). You should grant partial benefits
when the PCs reach a certain threshold or introduce
twists to the subsystem to ensure they continue to feel
engaged and rewarded over time.

149

18833957

4121904

4121904


Gamemastery Guide

18833958

18833958

4121904

TABLE 3–1: VICTORY POINT SCALES
Duration of Challenge
VP End Point
Quick encounter
3–5
Long encounter
7–10
Most of a session
15–25
Adventure-wide, sideline
15–20
Adventure-wide, forefront
25–50

VP Thresholds
—
4
5, 10, 15
5, 10, 15
10, 20, 30, 40

The values also depend on various factors. These might
include the DCs, the number of chances the PCs get to
gain Victory Points, and the flexibility of how the PCs can
deploy themselves (for example, if PCs are all forced to try
something they might not be trained in, it could cause critical
failures). They might also include the amount of effort the
PCs need to spend on tasks that don’t directly earn Victory
Points—such as checks to Discover information about
NPCs using the Influence subsystem. Keep all these in mind
when deciding what end point you want to use.

RUNNING YOUR
SUBSYSTEM

When running your new subsystem, be sure to keep the
challenges fresh by using a variety of different skills and
options to encourage creativity and cooperation, rather
than just using the same check over and over again, where
PCs can expect diminishing returns. You can also use
timers to encourage each PC to participate or even create

mechanics that directly encourage each PC to participate,
like setting penalties for the same PC attempting checks
repeatedly, or for two PCs attempting the same check.
You can even have challenges that require all the PCs to
participate. For instance, if the party’s host is welcoming
every guest individually, each PC might have to make
an impression in their own way, or during infiltration,
each PC might have to test their ability to Impersonate
or Sneak. You’ll likely find that some approaches should
be automatic successes if they’re well-suited to the task,
or automatic failures for ideas that are likely impossible.

REWARDS

How you structure rewards for your subsystem
depends greatly on its scope. A subsystem resolved
in a single sitting usually gives accomplishment XP
unless it is particularly demanding, in which case it
could be considered a full-scale encounter. Meanwhile,
subsystems that span over the course of multiple sessions
or the entire campaign might generate accomplishment
XP at meaningful milestones along the way. If you have
a long-spanning subsystem that’s fairly low profile and
behind the scenes or is not success-oriented, such as a
subsystem to track what type of ruler the PCs’ patron
will become based on the PCs’ decisions, you might not
give XP directly from the subsystem, since in that case
“success” is undefined.

150

18833958

4121905

4121905


Subsystems

INFLUENCE

When the PCs need to gain favor with or sway over an NPC to achieve their goals,
sometimes a Deception, Diplomacy, or Intimidation check isn’t enough to get the job
done. In these cases, you can implement the influence subsystem in a social encounter.
Influence is a short-term subsystem wherein the PCs
accumulate Influence Points during a social encounter
with an NPC to represent their increasing influence.
These encounters are a race against the clock to reach
Influence Point thresholds in order to sway the NPC. It’s
perfect for a single social gathering—whether it’s a party,
a treaty negotiation, or even an attempt to persuade
various members of a panel of judges. Because of the
variety of Influence skill options and the ability to use
Perception to uncover more information, every character
has something important to contribute in the influence
subsystem, as opposed to situations where only one
character has Diplomacy.
The influence subsystem divides a social encounter
into rounds, with the number of rounds representing
the length of the social event. Rounds last any amount
of time that you determine, depending on the needs of
the narrative, though somewhere between 15 minutes
and an hour is typical. During each round, each PC can
act once to either Influence or Discover.

NPC’s personal biases, one of the NPC’s resistances, or
one of the NPC’s weaknesses.
Failure You learn no information.
Critical Failure Choose a piece of information to learn about, as
success, but the information is incorrect. For instance, you

3
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18833959

18833959

4121905

INFLUENCE
CONCENTRATION LINGUISTIC

You attempt to make a favorable impression on an NPC to
convince the NPC to support your cause. Choose an NPC,
and attempt a skill check to impress that NPC. The DC,
and whether success is possible, depend on the NPC’s
preferences (typically found in the NPC’s influence
stat block).
Critical Success You gain 2 Influence Points with
the chosen NPC.
Success You gain 1 Influence Point with the chosen
NPC.
Failure You gain no Influence Points with the chosen NPC.
Critical Failure You lose 1 Influence Point with the chosen
NPC.

DISCOVER
CONCENTRATION

SECRET

You watch or study an NPC to learn more about that NPC’s
preferences. Choose an NPC and attempt a Perception
check or an appropriate skill check determined by the GM.
The DC is typically found in the NPC’s influence stat block.
Critical Success Choose two of the options detailed in Success
below; you can choose the same option twice to learn
two pieces of information from the same category.
Success Choose one of the following: You learn which
skill that can Influence the NPC has the lowest DC
(skipping any skills that you already know), one of the

151

18833959

4121906

4121906


Gamemastery Guide

SAMPLE STAT BLOCK
In this example, the PCs try to convince a grizzled landlord
to not evict a theatrical troupe from a dilapidated building
he owns. It’s a 3rd-level challenge. He is a busy, practical
man and gives the PCs only 45 minutes (3 rounds) to
make their case.

DANPHY MOLLWETHER
LE

18833960

18833960

MEDIUM

HUMAN

HUMANOID

Penny-pinching landlord
Perception +9
Will +12
Discovery DC 13 Mercantile Lore, DC 18 Perception,
DC 16 Society
Influence Skills DC 16 Accounting Lore (noting
how the theater could be made profitable),
DC 16 Crafting (volunteering to repair the building),
DC 20 Intimidation, DC 20 Performance, DC 22
Diplomacy, DC 24 Deception
Influence 4: Mr. Mollwether gives the troupe 1 week to
get him his back rent, with interest, before evicting
them.
Influence 6: Mr. Mollwether gives the troupe 1 month to
get him his back rent before evicting them.
Influence 8: Mr. Mollwether allows the troupe to stay,
reduces their rent, and forgives half their debt.
Resistances The landlord thinks in practical terms,
with little patience for the “good-for-nothings” of the
troupe. Appeals directed at sympathy alone increase
the check’s DC by 2.
Weaknesses Mr. Mollwether used to visit the theater
often as a small child, and performing one of his
favorite old songs or plays brings tears to his eyes and
reduces the Performance DC by 2.
Background Mollwether was raised by wealthy
parents who loved the arts and took him to the theater
often. A scandal left the family broke, and Danphy
clawed his way back up to a decent living. Becoming
something of a slumlord, he owns several properties
now and still feels he must exploit others to survive.
Appearance An elderly man in cheap dress clothes,
Mr. Mollwether looks like he’s never felt a moment of
love for anyone in his whole life.
Personality Impatient, crotchety, skeptical
Penalty Antagonizing Mr. Mollwether by
“sermonizing” or “wasting his time” causes him to cut
the meeting short, reducing it to 2 rounds instead of 3.

might think the NPC is susceptible to flattery when actually
the NPC is resistant to flattery.

INFLUENCE STAT BLOCKS

NPCs in the influence subsystem have little need for
many of the statistics you’ll find in an ordinary creature
stat block. However, it might help you to prepare for

the social encounter by creating an influence stat block
for each prominent NPC. These are optional; if you can
keep most information straight in your head, you might
skip this step or just write down the first three categories
to keep the numbers straight.
Influence stat blocks are flexible and contain only
the stats that you are essential to running the NPC
during a social encounter, leaving the rest out. The
main stats that matter are the NPC’s Perception and
Will modifiers.

NPC NAME
TRAITS

A succinct description of the NPC, such as “Famous musician”
or “Popular baron.”
Perception The NPC’s Perception modifier, plus potentially
relevant spells such as true sight.
Will The NPC’s Will modifier, plus any special adjustments.
Discovery The Perception DC to Discover information about
the NPC, as well as any skill checks to Discover their DCs.
Influence Skills The skills the PCs can use to Influence the
NPC are listed here with their DCs, in order from the
lowest DC (the skill that works best) to the highest DC.
If a skill isn’t listed but a player gives a strong narrative
explanation for using it, you can add it as an appropriate
DC (usually the highest listed DC). Diplomacy should
usually be on this list, but should rarely be the best skill to
Influence an NPC, in order to encourage and reward using
Discover to learn and cater to an NPC’s interests.
Influence Thresholds The number of Influence Points
required to Influence the PC, and the benefits for
meeting them. Some NPCs might have multiple influence
thresholds, granting the PCs additional benefits or favors
as they cross more thresholds.
Resistances Some NPCs are resistant to certain tactics,
biased against certain types of people, or may get
defensive when a certain topic comes up. Any of these
makes it harder for a PC to convince them. For instance,
an NPC might find flattery inane, dislike wizards, or
bristle at any mention of their ex-spouse. Typically, an
NPC’s resistance increases the DC of the associated
check to Influence by 2 (or 5 for stronger resistances),
but it could have farther-ranging consequences, such as
losing Influence Points or angering the NPC enough that
attempting to Influence them again is impossible.
Weaknesses Most NPCs have at least one weakness that
clever and observant PCs can use to their advantage,
whether it’s a deep-seated insecurity, a desire for power, a
favorite hobby, a bias toward a certain group, or a hidden
secret the PCs could threaten to expose. When a PC
incorporates an NPC’s weakness, it typically decreases
the associated Influence check’s DC by 2 (or 5 for
stronger weaknesses), but it could have farther‑ranging
effects, such as gaining automatic Influence Points or
even automatically influencing the NPC regardless of
how many Influence Points the PCs have achieved so far.

4121906

152

18833960

4121907

4121907


Subsystems

3
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18833961

18833961

4121907

After the influence stat block, you might want to
list important information to help you roleplay the
NPC and incorporate the NPC into your influence
encounter. You can list any of the following details that
are relevant to your NPC: their background (a brief
bio focusing on information relevant to the encounter),
appearance, personality (this can just be a list of
adjectives), affiliations, public goals, hidden agendas,
or the penalty for antagonizing the NPC (or possibly
for failing to Influence the NPC, depending on the way
you structure the encounter).

SETTING DCS
When setting DCs, it’s often good to start with a “social
level” for the NPC and set their DCs accordingly.
Use the DC adjustments from page 504 of the Core
Rulebook just like you normally would. A good
starting place is setting the NPC’s Will modifier, then
taking that DC and adjusting it for skills that are more
or less likely to work.
For instance, for a 3rd-level challenge, you might
give an NPC a +12 Will modifier and use 22 as the base
DC. You might say that’s the DC for Diplomacy but
then determine that the NPC is difficult to intimidate,
and so you apply the hard DC adjustment to make
the Intimidation DC 24. Maybe you also determine

that she loves different varieties of wine, resulting in
an incredibly easy DC adjustment to get DC 12 for
Alcohol Lore.

RUNNING AN INFLUENCE
ENCOUNTER

When running an influence encounter, let the PCs
be creative and use a diverse set of skills whenever
possible. Be open to improvisation, and change the
structure of the encounter if something interesting
presents itself. The PCs set the pace and choose with
whom they interact. It’s up to you to make sure every
NPC is distinct, react to the PCs’ interactions with the
NPCs, and lend overall structure to the encounter by
making sure it feels like a living, breathing event rather
than just a series of skill checks.
Think about how the number of rounds of a social
encounter relate to the overall event. For instance, if
you have a four-course banquet and 6 rounds, you
could have 1 round for introductions before the food
arrives, 1 round for each of the courses, and 1 last
round of conversations after the final course. NPCs
might filter in and out or become unavailable for
conversations as they are occupied by various tasks,
or become particularly eager to engage a PC. That sort
of change help makes the NPC feel a bit more real and
helps break up any repetition in your encounter.

153

18833961

4121908

4121908


Gamemastery Guide

RESEARCH

When the PCs are trying to discover important information while challenged by a time
limit or other interesting twist, the research subsystem is just the right thing to lend their
efforts more urgency and weight.
In the research subsystem, PCs accumulate Research
Points and learn new information or gain other benefits
upon reaching specific thresholds. Use this subsystem if the
PCs face a time constraint, rival research group, or other
form of external pressure or condition that could end the
PCs’ efforts early. Otherwise, you can simply use the rules
in the Core Rulebook, since the PCs are free to keep rolling
until they uncover everything there is to find.
In this subsystem, time passes in rounds spanning several
hours to a day of research. Each round, the characters use
the Research exploration activity to gain Research
Points (RP). As time passes and the party earns
more RP, they gain knowledge and rewards, but
also might face consequences or events. Some
of these events might interrupt the round with
a different kind of encounter (disrupting
the Research activity), such as a social
encounter with an intelligent book or
a combat encounter with a guardian.

RESEARCH

18833962

18833962

CONCENTRATION

EXPLORATION

LINGUISTIC

You comb through information to learn
more about the topic at hand. Choose
your research topic, section of the
library, or other division depending on
the form of research, and attempt a skill
check. The skills to use and the DC for the
check depend on the choice you made.
Critical Success You gain 2 RP.
Success You gain 1 RP.
Critical Failure You make a false
discovery and lose 1 RP.

BUILDING A
LIBRARY

“Library” is the general term the
research subsystem uses to designate
the setting of the PCs’ research. Despite
the name, the library doesn’t necessarily
consist of a quiet hall full of books. It
could be an Astral memory palace, a
collection of iconographic artwork, or
even a group the party is questioning. In
most cases, to engage the whole party
and add a little decision-making to the
research, you’ll want to give your
research topic or library at least
one variable or subdivision that the

PCs need to decide how to handle. For instance, you might
give the PCs three different research topics to study, each
using different skills and providing different rewards. The
library might have several rooms or sections with different
challenges to research, allowing you to reward PCs with
skills that aren’t typically associated with research; perhaps
the books on aeromancy are all flying above the top shelves
of towering bookcases, requiring a round of Athletics checks
to represent climbing up and down ladders to retrieve them
and reach the first threshold. A variety of skills and
decisions, along with vivid descriptions, are the key
to an engaging and memorable research session,
rather than just a string of die rolls by the wizard.

CHOOSING THRESHOLDS
Once you’ve decided what your library
looks like and how the library and
research options are structured, it’s
time to set the research thresholds for
each topic. Thresholds are your
opportunity to reveal intriguing
new information and introduce
different types of challenges. Each
threshold should provide interesting
information; if it doesn’t, you should
probably have fewer thresholds.
Thresholds can change the state
of the library (perhaps the first
threshold is simply cleaning and
organizing the library so the PCs
can find the tomes they need),
reveal information, give the
PCs a reward (like access to an
ancient uncommon or rare feat or
spell they discover in library’s depths),
trigger an encounter, alter the skills or
DCs for further research, or anything
else you can imagine, but they should
always do something.
If your library covers multiple
topics, each has its own set of
thresholds. You’ll typically want
to require fewer Research Points
to reach each one and use fewer
thresholds per topic.
Think about the
constraints preventing
the PCs from researching
as long as they want, and use

4121908

154

18833962

4121909

4121909

18833963

18833963


Subsystems

those constraints to determine how many Research Points
they must earn to reach each threshold. You don’t need
to evenly space thresholds—you could require very few
Research Points to learn crucial clues you want to ensure
the PCs receive and a much larger number to reach the
final threshold that grants a special reward.

LIBRARY STAT BLOCK
When you build a library, you can use a stat block to
organize the information. In a published adventure, you’ll
find libraries presented in the format below. There’s no need
to include entries that aren’t applicable for your library.

LIBRARY’S NAME

LIBRARY (LEVEL)

TRAITS

Division Name and Description Whether it’s a section of a
physical library, one of several research topics the PCs are
studying, or something more creative, this is the name of
one of the library’s divisions. If the divisions are separate
topics, they’ll each have their own thresholds, but if the
divisions are separate areas all related to the same topic
or topics, they might have RP maximums instead, after
which the PCs have exhausted the information in that
area. Repeat these sections for the library’s other divisions;
if using RP maximums, make sure the divisions provide
enough Research Points to reach the final threshold.
Research Checks The skills or other checks the PCs can
attempt to Research the division are listed here with their
DCs, in order from the lowest DC (the skill that works best)
to the highest DC. If a skill isn’t listed but a player provides
a strong narrative explanation for using it, you can add it at
an appropriate DC (usually the highest listed DC). Academia
Lore and Library Lore will often be listed in these entries.
Research Thresholds Each threshold lists the number of RP
required to reach it, followed by the effects for meeting that
threshold. Thresholds are listed in order from first (requiring
the fewest RP) to last (the highest threshold).
Beneath the stat block, you can list any events that occur
based on timing rather than the PCs’ RP total (such as a
threatening message arriving on the third day), as well as
any other important details.

RUNNING RESEARCH

When running the research subsystem, think about the two
factors that set the pace of the research and allow you to
break it up: the length of each round of research, and the
thresholds in the research. Use both of these in tandem to
breathe life into the session and draw the players into the
game. Ideally the PCs are aware of whatever pressure requires
them to finish the research, so as rounds pass, the tension
increases. As long as the PCs are able to get the information
they came for, it’s fine if they don’t learn everything the
library has to offer; in fact, you might intentionally create a
situation allowing the PCs time to glean only some of a list
of special rewards, forcing them to prioritize their favorites.

SAMPLE STAT BLOCK
In this example, the PCs are trying to research hidden occult
secrets about hags known only to the fey of a strange
sylvan library. It’s a 7th-level challenge. If you’d like to use
this sample library for a different research topic, just change
the results of each threshold and replace any Occultism
Research checks with checks appropriate to the new topic!

GLADE OF FORGOTTEN TIME
FEY

3
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools

LIBRARY 7

PRIMAL

Field of Tomeflowers Five-foot stems open up into
colorful petaled tomes; Maximum RP 10
Research Checks DC 18 Academia Lore or Library Lore,
DC 23 Occultism
Loremother Tree A powerful intelligence slumbers deep
within this ancient oak, awakened by communion or
music; Maximum RP 15
Research Checks DC 21 Performance, DC 23 Nature, DC
25 Occultism
Sprite Swarm Thousands of iridescent sprites flit about,
eager to offer tidbits of information, though it is not
always reliable; Maximum RP 5
Research Checks DC 23 Diplomacy, DC 23 Occultism,
DC 25 Society, DC 28 Perception
5 Research Points The PCs learn apocryphal fey legends
that the first hags were once cruel fey queens twisted
by inner corruption. They learn details about hag
reproduction, changelings, and the hag mother’s Call.
10 Research Points The PCs learn the location of an
ancient, twisted grove in the First World rumored to
hold a secret treasure connected to hags. Attaining
this knowledge comes at a cost: hag malice solidifies
into two will-o’-wisps and animates some of the
glade’s plant matter into a shambler. The three
creatures attack the PCs together.
15 Research Points The PCs learn a variety of occult
folk divinations said to detect the presence of nearby
hags. Among them is a functioning uncommon spell:
read omens.
20 Research Points The loremother tree stirs and
partially awakens, issuing the PCs a dire warning
about danger in the knowledge they seek. Replace
the loremother tree’s Performance Research check
with a DC 28 Diplomacy check to convince the tree
to share further knowledge.
25 Research Points The whole glade goes quiet, and
the PCs feel a pall fall over their hearts. The PCs are
close, but all Research check DCs increase by 2.
30 Research Points The PCs learn even more esoteric
wisdom about hags. However, they have drawn the
attention of a coven of annis hags, who materialize
to destroy the party and their newfound knowledge.
If the PCs run out of time before reaching this point,
the coven erases any further information before
attacking the PCs out of spite.

Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121909

155

18833963

4121910

4121910


Gamemastery Guide

CHASES

When the PCs pursue a fleeing adversary or quarry—or someone chases them instead—
adding twists and turns to the pursuit builds suspense and makes the outcome more uncertain
than if it were based on Speed alone. The chases subsystem helps you create cinematic
scenes where the PCs must quickly overcome obstacles, from following someone through a
crowded market to carrying a desperately urgent message over a dangerous mountain pass.
The Core Rulebook’s Speed rules work well for short
sprints through fairly clear terrain. Over longer distances
through more complex environments, though, the path is
rarely so straightforward. The chase subsystem shifts the
emphasis from raw Speed to facing down the kinds of
unpredictable obstacles that characters might encounter in
a longer pursuit so you can create a thrilling chase scene.
Chases are a special type of encounter. Each round,
the pursued character or characters act first, then the
pursuing characters act. Typically, to reduce variance,
the PCs roll checks to progress while their opponents
proceed at a steady pace, but if you want to emphasize
the back-and-forth nature of a particular chase, you
could have both sides roll instead. Characters in the same
group can act in whatever order they prefer, each taking a
turn. A character must act on their turn. If they pass their
turn or are unable to act, they’re unable to help the group
and automatically cause the group to lose 1 Chase Point.
Depending on the scale of your chase, establish at the
beginning how long each round lasts so the PCs understand
how much they can accomplish in that time. Is it essentially
a 3-action turn, or does it take minutes, hours, or days?

18833964

18833964

OBSTACLES

During a chase, all the characters must overcome a series
of obstacles that represent challenges—from locked doors
to deceptive bogs—during the different legs of the pursuit.
These obstacles aren’t separated by specific distances; the
distance is narrative and can vary between obstacles as
needed for the story you’re telling. Travel times between
obstacles can vary, too. The time scale you choose determines
how PCs can act when dealing with an obstacle.
Each obstacle requires a certain number of Chase Points
to overcome—typically 1 per party member for a standard
obstacle, though particularly challenging obstacles might
require more (listed in an obstacle’s Chase Points entry).
Typically, there are multiple ways to overcome an obstacle;
for example, characters could evade a guard or bribe them
to look away. Each approach typically requires a skill check
or Perception check, but sometimes a saving throw, an
attack roll, or something even more unusual, like a casting a
certain spell (listed in an obstacle’s Overcome entry).
On a character’s turn, they describe what they do to
help the group get past the obstacle. They then attempt
any required roll, or perform the required action for a
choice without a check. If they attempt a roll, the result
determines how many Chase Points the character gains.

Critical Success The PCs gain 2 Chase Points.
Success The PCs gain 1 Chase Point.
Critical Failure The PCs lose 1 Chase Point.
If the means of bypassing the obstacle helps automatically
without requiring a check—such as using a certain spell to
assist—the PCs typically get 1 Chase Point. You can increase
that to 2 if you feel the action is extremely helpful.
Chase Points represent the ability of the whole group to
bypass the obstacle. A character who critically succeeds is
able to help the other characters continue onward, while
one who critically fails needs extra assistance. Players
often have ideas for ways to overcome the obstacle beyond
the choices you created for the obstacle. If their idea is
applicable, you’ll need to determine the DC and skill or
other statistic being used for that approach. This is great
as long as it’s creative, but be wary of a situation where a
character who is legendary at a skill tries to justify how
they can bypass every obstacle with that skill, such as using
Acrobatics to tumble around them all, or the like. You can
determine that some tactics just won’t work against certain
obstacles, or would help only one character without
benefiting the rest and therefore aren’t all that useful.
Once the PCs accumulate enough Chase Points to
overcome the obstacle, they immediately move to the next.
Extra Chase Points don’t carry over to the next obstacle—
each requires its own number of Chase Points to overcome.
However, anyone who hasn’t already taken their turn that
round can still take it against the new obstacle. Consequently,
the characters best suited to overcoming the current obstacle
might act first, since the remaining characters might be better
suited against the next one. The number of Chase Points the
PCs have can never fall below 0.
It might help to put your obstacles in a stat block for easy
reference. Inside published adventures, chase obstacles are
likely to be presented in stat block form, as follows.

CROWD

4121910

OBSTACLE 1

Chase Points 4; Overcome DC 15 Acrobatics or Athletics to
weave or push through, DC 13 Society to follow the flow
Throngs of people crowd the streets, making it difficult to
continue the chase.

BUILDING A CHASE

When building a chase, first build your obstacles and then
decide how far ahead the pursued character or characters
begin and at what pace the NPCs will move. Having the
NPCs clear one obstacle per round is a good rule of thumb,

156

18833964

4121911

4121911

18833965

18833965


Subsystems

but it could vary depending on the situation, and should
especially be slower against obstacles that require more
than 1 Chase Point per character to overcome.
Select or build obstacles highlighting a variety of
different skills and other options so everyone in the party
has a moment to shine. When choosing what skills can
bypass a given obstacle, ensure a variety of approaches
can work. If you’ve already decided that an obstacle
uses Stealth, selecting Thievery as the other option
doesn’t really offer opportunities for different types of
characters, since those who are good at Thievery are
very likely the same ones who are good at Stealth. On
the other hand, offering Athletics as an alternative gives
a champion who’s terrible at Stealth a way to help. The
group can help cover for a character who is less capable
at a particular obstacle, but it’s more fun for players to
present substantially different options for each obstacle.
Use the following guidelines to determine how many
obstacles you need for your chase. These numbers assume
that the pursued party can reach a certain location to
end the chase (as described in Ending Chases). If there’s
no such escape, you might need more obstacles.
Short: 6 obstacles, about 10–20 minutes of game time
Medium: 8 obstacles, about 15–25 minutes of game time
Long: 10 obstacles, about 20–30 minutes of game time

SETTING OBSTACLE DCS
When you set the DCs for an obstacle, you’ll typically be
using simple DCs. Use a proficiency rank that’s generally
appropriate for the PCs’ level if you want the obstacle to
be a significant one. As noted earlier, you’ll typically want
to select a couple different ways the group can get past
an obstacle. At least one check should be have an easy
or very easy adjustment, while the other check should
have a standard or hard DC. In some cases you might
use something other than a simple DC; for example, if a
specific NPC has put up a magical barrier, you would use
their spell DC. This might result in some pretty tough DCs
or even impassable obstacles, so use this carefully!
If a PC improvises a different way to get around an
obstacle from what you planned, set the DC just like you
would normally when picking a DC on the fly. Don’t
worry about adjusting the DC of the check to be easy or
very easy, because the PC is likely to be good at the skill
they’ve chosen to use.

SHORTCUTS AND SPLIT PATHS
You might want to build a chase with multiple paths that
split and rejoin so you can have a shortcut (with easier
DCs or fewer obstacles) or paths that appeal to different
types of characters. For instance, one obstacle might
allow a PC who critically succeeds at a Perception check
to find a faster path along a canal, without the obstacles
of a busy street. This can be fun, but can also split up the
group. Familiarize yourself with the Solo Chases sidebar
above to make similar adjustments for a divided group.

SOLO CHASES
Sometimes circumstances might require you to run a chase
where the PCs are each progressing individually, rather than
as a group, such as if they get split up. The danger therein is
that a player can easily become frustrated if their character
is stuck at an obstacle where it’s extremely difficult to
succeed at either choice, and no allies can help them. In
these chases, it’s best to allow even a single success be
enough for a character to progress to the next obstacle, and
have a critical success give the character a +2 circumstance
bonus on their first check against the next obstacle.

3
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules

ENDING CHASES
Once you have the obstacles, decide the end conditions.
Chases often end when the pursuer reaches the same
obstacle as the pursued, leading to a combat encounter or
other scene. However, it’s less clear when to end a chase
otherwise. It’s typically best to have an obstacle that ends
the chase with the pursued character getting away, as long
as they overcome the obstacle before being captured. This is
usually better than ending the chase after a certain number of
rounds, because reaching a hideaway makes more narrative
sense and because you might not be able to predict how far
the pursued characters move in those rounds, making you
run out of obstacles. You can also end the chase in favor
of the pursued characters if they ever get a certain number
of obstacles ahead of the pursuers (typically three), as the
pursuers simply lose the trail. You should still have an end
point to the chase, though, in case that never happens.

NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121911

TYPES OF CHASES
• Chase Down: The PCs pursue adversaries. The PCs go
second in initiative since they’re the pursuers. Start the
enemies one obstacle ahead of the PCs (or at the same
location for a short chase), and end the chase if the
PCs catch up to the enemies, or if the enemies reach a
certain location that represents their safety or escape.
• Run Away: The PCs attempt to escape. They’ll go first
in initiative since they’re being pursued. It’s usually best
to start them one obstacle ahead of their foes and end
the chase if they reach a certain location or are three
obstacles ahead of their foes at the end of a round.
• Beat the Clock: The PCs try to get through all the
obstacles before a certain number of rounds passes,
such as if the PCs are trying to outrun a natural disaster
or race in a timed challenge. The number of obstacles
should usually be equal to the number of rounds.
• Competitive Chase: The PCs and their adversaries
are both chasing the same thing or trying to reach the
same location, and whoever gets there first wins. This
works like chase down, except that either party could
win. Because there is more than one set of pursuers,
you might have the PCs and their competitors roll
initiative to see who goes first each round (while still
moving all NPCs at a steady rate.)

157

18833965

4121912

4121912


Gamemastery Guide

18833966

18833966

4121912

RUNNING A CHASE

When running a chase, narrate the scene and give vivid
descriptions of the obstacles the PCs face, rather than
just reading off a list of skills and immediately having
the players start rolling dice and making checks. A chase
is a framework for roleplaying, not just a dice game.
Encourage the PCs to describe what they’re doing,
and how they’re helping their comrades overcome
each obstacle.
Typically, it’s best to tell the players the DCs of the
default options, so they can make informed decisions.
At the least, you should indicate the relative difficulty
of the clear paths. The PCs are adventurers, so they’re
experienced at assessing which path is going to be easier
or harder.
Try to make it feel like the PCs are really part of
a chase scene, like in a movie. As each side makes
progress, describe how they pull ahead or close the
gap. PCs far from their foes might hear shouts in the
distance. As they get closer, they catch glimpses, and
then finally see their quarry in full view once they’re on
the enemies’ heels. Think about how the events of the
chase affect the environment, as well. For instance, if a
kaiju is chasing after the PCs, after the PCs overcome an
obstacle consisting of a thick copse of trees, you could
describe how the kaiju flattens the trees beneath its feet
as it stomps after them.

VISUAL AIDS
It can help your players visualize the chase to use a series
of cards or a rough map (such as a large-scale city map
rather than a 5-foot grid) to show locations. Use one
miniature or token to represent each side of the chase.
You might place cards with obstacle names on them face
down, revealing them as PCs reach them, and letting a PC
peek at an upcoming card if they scout it from a distance.

IF THE PCS GET STUCK
Sometimes despite their best efforts, an obstacle will stymie
the PCs over and over again. In most cases, after 3 rounds
of the PCs struggling with an obstacle that requires the
standard number of Chase Points, it’s a good idea to just say
they found another way around it. If the obstacle requires
more or fewer Chase Points, you can change the number of
rounds before letting them get past it. If presenting another
way around the obstacle just doesn’t make sense, such as
if a spherical barrier completely blocks the PCs, you might
introduce an NPC or other outside force that can help
them bypass it, but at a high cost.

SAMPLE OBSTACLES

You can use the following obstacles in your chases, which
are organized by environment. The name is followed by the
level of group they’re best suited for, and many include both
a basic version for lower levels and a higher-level version.

158

18833966

4121913

4121913

18833967

18833967


Subsystems

UNDERGROUND OBSTACLES
Crumbling Corridor (1st) DC 13 Acrobatics to avoid disturbing the walls, DC 15 Crafting to shore up the walls; Quaking Corridor (11th)
DC 25 Acrobatics, DC 30 Crafting
Fungus Grotto (1st)
DC 15 Fortitude to endure poisonous spore, DC 13 Survival to avoid the mushrooms; Virulent Fungi
(5th) DC 20 Fortitude, DC 18 Survival
Pit Trap (1st)
DC 13 Athletics to quickly climb out, DC 15 Perception to spot the trap before it’s triggered;
Exceptional Pit Trap (5th) DC 20 Athletics, DC 18 Perception
Wandering Gelatinous DC 18 Occultism to identify its deficiencies, DC 15 Stealth to sneak past; Wandering Black
Cube (1st)
Pudding (7th) DC 24 Occultism, DC 19 Stealth
Collapsed Tunnel (5th) DC 20 Athletics to dig through, DC 18 Perception to find a secret door around; Ancient Collapse (12th)
DC 30 Athletics, DC 28 Perception
Pendulum Trap (5th) DC 20 Reflex to dodge the blades, DC 15 Thievery to disable the tap; Panoply of Pendulums (12th)
DC 30 Reflex, DC 28 Thievery
Wooden Portcullis (8th) DC 25 Acrobatics to squeeze through, DC 20 Athletics to lift the gate; Iron Portcullis (11th)
DC 25 Acrobatics, DC 30 Athletics

URBAN OBSTACLES
Crowd (1st)

DC 15 Acrobatics or Athletics to weave or push through, DC 13 Society to follow the flow; Festival
Crowd (4th) DC 20 Athletics, DC 18 Society
Fruit Cart (1st)
DC 13 Athletics to vault over or smash through, DC 15 Intimidation to make the merchant move it;
Merchant Pavilion (5th) DC 20 Athletics, DC 22 Intimidation
Guard Dog (1st)
DC 14 Nature to calm, DC 16 Stealth to sneak past; Guard Roc (9th) DC 26 Nature, DC 28 Stealth
Rickety Rooftops (1st) DC 15 Acrobatics to cross clotheslines, DC 13 Athletics to jump from
roof to roof; Crumbling, Steep Rooftops (5th) DC 18 Acrobatics,
DC 20 Athletics
Wooden Fence (1st)
DC 13 Athletics to climb over, DC 15 Thievery to unlock a gate;
High Iron Fence (8th) DC 20 Athletics, DC 25 Thievery
Gang of Hooligans (2nd) DC 13 Deception to trick, DC 15 Stealth to sneak
past; Elite Criminals (12th) DC 28 Deception,
DC 30 Stealth
Twisting Alleyways
DC 17 Perception to find a path, DC 13 Society
(2nd)
to recall a map; Multi-Story Maze (7th) DC 22
Perception, DC 20 Society

3
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121913

WILDERNESS OBSTACLES
Deep Mud (1st)

Downpour (1st)

Rope Bridge (1st)

Rushing River (1st)

Steep Hills (1st)

Swarm of Wasps (1st)

Tangled Forest (2nd)

DC 15 Athletics to slog through, DC 13 Perception
to find a path; Horrid Bog (5th) DC 20 Athletics,
DC 18 Perception
DC 13 Fortitude to push through, DC 15 Nature to
predict the weather; Magical Thunderstorm (5th)
DC 30 Fortitude, DC 25 Nature
DC 15 Acrobatics to cross carefully, DC 13 Crafting
to make repairs; Solitary Frayed Rope (11th)
DC 25 Acrobatics, DC 30 Crafting
DC 15 Athletics to swim or hop across
stones, DC 13 Survival to find a ford nearby; Flash
Flood (5th) DC 20 Athletics, DC 18 Survival
DC 13 Athletics to climb across, DC 15
Perception to find easier path; Rugged Mountain
(5th) DC 20 Athletics, DC 18 Perception
DC 15 Fortitude to endure stings, DC 13
Survival to smoke them out; Those Aren’t
Wasps! (5th) DC 20 Fortitude, DC 18 Survival
DC 17 Perception to find the way, DC 13
Survival to plot a path; Enchanted Forest
(5th) DC 20 Perception, DC 18 Survival

159

18833967

4121914

4121914


Gamemastery Guide

INFILTRATION

Not all elements of an adventure can be resolved with force of arms and the sizzle
of deadly magic. Sometimes subtlety is required to circumvent foes or accomplish a
goal. When the characters need to rely on improvisation and fast thinking to infiltrate
a stronghold or organization to save the day, the infiltration subsystem provides a
framework for those adventures.
An infiltration requires the heroes to employ guile and
subtlety to achieve one or more objectives without
directly confronting their enemies. The PCs’ goal might be
sneaking into a den of thieves to relieve them of ill-gotten
gains, navigating the winding passages of the city watch
headquarters to break a friend out of prison, or putting
themselves in just the right spot to snatch up the right
person or the correct item at just the right time. Whatever
the case, the heroes are working to avoid drawing the
attention of an opposing party, such as the members of a
thieves’ guild, the prison guards, or the invited guests at an
upscale gala. Should the heroes draw too much attention,
they might be attacked, arrested, or thrown out—in any
case, blocked from accomplishing their goal.
An infiltration is fundamentally a roleplaying activity.
The players narrate their characters’ actions in response
to the situations around them, and the infiltration
subsystem provides a framework to measure incremental
success within the overall endeavor. An infiltration takes
place over the course of multiple rounds, though it’s up to
you to determine how long a round is. One round might
encompass 10 minutes or 1 hour of in-world time, or
something completely different depending on the story
and your group’s preferences.

18833968

18833968

BUILDING AN INFILTRATION

When creating an infiltration, you’ll want to start with the
party’s broad goals and an idea of how much time you
and your players want to spend. The more complex an
infiltration, the longer it will take to play out at the table.

OBJECTIVE
The first thing you’ll need to determine is the party’s
objective, or broad goal. Maybe the PCs need to find their
way into some hidden sanctum, find a particular person
within an organization, locate and get away with a bit of
treasure, or plant a piece of evidence. An infiltration can
consist of a single objective, but a more complex one might
include two or more objectives in sequence—the PCs
might first need to find a way to enter the cult’s sanctum,
then open the vault, and then escape with the relic.
To achieve an objective, the PCs must overcome a
certain number of obstacles—specific challenges the PCs
face, such as getting across a moat or past a nosy butler.
For a simple objective, they might need to overcome only
one or two obstacles, while a more complex one might
require several.

It’s a good idea to offer more obstacles as options than
the characters need to overcome, and the PCs don’t all
have to choose the same ones. This represents the fact that
there’s more than one way into a castle, and allows PCs to
choose obstacles that play to their strengths. It also means
you have more options you can adapt if the PCs decide on
a truly novel way to tackle their objective.
Once a character has overcome the required number of
obstacles to reach the objective, they move on to the next
objective. This might mean that some characters move on
to a second objective and start making progress toward it
while other characters are still completing obstacles from
the first objective. When all characters have completed the
final objective, the infiltration is a success!
While the characters are pursuing their objectives,
however, they need to avoid notice. Awareness Points (AP)
measure the extent to which an opposing party is aware of
the PCs’ actions, and apply to the party as a whole. As the
PCs’ Awareness Points increase, the infiltration becomes
more difficult as the opposition shores up its defenses.
If the PCs generate too many Awareness Points, they are
found out and their infiltration fails altogether!

4121914

OBSTACLES
Each obstacle has certain statistics that define how it works
in play. Infiltration Points (IP) represent a character’s
progress toward overcoming an obstacle. Each obstacle
requires gaining a certain number of Infiltration Points to
overcome—typically 1 or 2, but some challenging obstacles
might require more. PCs can gain Infiltration Points in
multiple ways—usually through a skill or Perception
check, but sometimes another roll or even the use of a
spell or item. These methods are listed in the obstacle’s
Overcome entry. Unlike obstacles for chases, these use a
difficulty band for the PCs’ level, rather than using set DCs.
The Overcome entry also lists whether the PCs need to
overcome an object individually or as a group. For individual
obstacles, each PC needs to earn the required number of
Infiltration Points themself, while for group obstacles, all
PCs working toward that obstacle pool their Infiltration
Points toward it together. For example, each PC trying to
scale a wall needs to earn points on their own, but the PCs
could work together to search a guildhall for clues, and once
one PC has picked a lock, everyone can enter.
A particular PC can overcome an individual obstacle
only once during an objective; likewise, the party can
overcome a group obstacle only once.

160

18833968

4121915

4121915

18833969

18833969


Subsystems

Obstacles in Play

SETTING INFILTRATION SKILLS AND DCS

On a character’s turn, the character describes what
they do to get past the obstacle. They then attempt any
required check (or perform the required action, if their
choice doesn’t require a check). The result of the check
determines how many Infiltration Points the character
gains toward overcoming that obstacle—or whether they
instead raise suspicions and accrue Awareness Points!
Critical Success The PC gains 2 Infiltration Points.
Success The PC gains 1 Infiltration Point.
Failure The PCs accrue 1 Awareness Point.
Critical Failure The PCs accrue 2 Awareness Points.
If the character’s actions automatically help without
requiring a check, like using a spell, they usually gain 1 IP,
but you can award 2 for particularly helpful actions.
Sometimes a PC might become stuck on an individual
obstacle. Some opportunities (page 162) allow PCs to
spend their turn helping others overcome a tricky obstacle.

Many of the sample infiltration activities and events give a DC
range instead of a fixed DC. Set the DCs based on the standard
DC of the party level using the table on page 503 of the Core
Rulebook, and adjust them using Table 10–6: DC Adjustments
on page 504. When given a range of skills for an activity or
event, you should vary the difficulty based on the needs of the
story. For instance, if a PC is Scouting a Location, you might
want to use a low DC for Stealth (because it’s easier to scout
when unnoticed), a hard one for Perception (because while
the PC might see the enemy, the enemy might also see them),
and a very hard DC for Society (because walking in like you
belong is difficult if you don’t have an invitation or the right
uniform). This not only adds a certain degree of plausibility,
but by planning for and allowing a broad range of skills as
means to complete the activity, you also become better
prepared for when your players improvise.

Pacing

AWARENESS POINTS

The number of obstacles to require the PCs to overcome
for an objective depends partly on the complexity of
the infiltration. For shorter infiltrations, use fewer and
lower-IP obstacles; for a longer, more complex heist,
you can add more obstacles with greater complexity.
Also, bear in mind how many checks the PCs will need
to attempt to complete their obstacles. An objective
with mostly low-IP group obstacles will move quickly
because only a few rolls are required, compared to one
with mostly individual obstacles that each PC needs to
roll separately for.

The trick of any infiltration is to get it done before anyone
notices. Awareness Points measure the opposition’s
awareness of the PCs’ efforts, helping you keep the pressure
on and ramp up the urgency. While Infiltration Points are
specific to a given obstacle, Awareness Points are a single
pool spanning the entire infiltration and all participants.
Awareness Points increase in three different ways.
When a PC fails a check to overcome an obstacle, they
incur 1 Awareness Point (or 2 on a critical failure).
Other failed checks during the infiltration typically
don’t increase the Awareness Point total unless the
failure would reasonably cause a disruption. Awareness
Points also increase by 1 at the end of each round of
the infiltration, as the passage of time makes it more
likely that the PCs will be discovered. Finally, the PCs
earn Awareness Points whenever their activities are
disruptive enough to draw attention to the infiltration,
subject to GM discretion.
The effects of Awareness Points occur when the PCs
reach certain thresholds. The specific effects and thresholds
are up to you and your story, but typically for every 5 AP
the PCs accrue, the challenges become harder, and if the
PCs accrue enough Awareness Points (usually equal to
twice the number of Infiltration Points necessary for the
party as a whole to overcome all necessary obstacles), the
infiltration fails.
Each threshold should have an effect. It might increase
the DCs for obstacles, introduce a complication, spark
a combat encounter, or have other effects. Reaching
the highest tier of Awareness Points means that the PCs
fail, but that doesn’t have to be the end of the story!
Failed infiltrations are an opportunity to introduce new
challenges and move the story forward in a different way.
This basic Awareness Point scheme for an infiltration
requiring the PCs to earn 10 IP can be used as is or
tailored to your game.

Sample Obstacles
While you’ll want to create custom obstacles to suit the
details of your infiltration, the following examples can be
used directly in many infiltrations, or as inspiration for
your own creations. You can also use the sample chase
obstacles on page 159 as starting points.

GUARD POST

OBSTACLE

Infiltration Points 2 (individual); Overcome standard, hard, or
very hard Deception, Diplomacy, or Stealth
Guards cluster at a checkpoint, alert for unusual activity.

LOCKED DOOR

OBSTACLE

Infiltration Points 1 (group); Overcome hard or very hard
Athletics or Thievery
A locked door separates the heroes from their target.

TRAPOBSTACLE
Infiltration Points 3 (group); Overcome hard or very hard Thievery
A trap bars the characters’ passage. This obstacle follows the
normal degrees of success for an obstacle, with the following
modification for critical failure.
Critical Failure The PCs accrue 2 AP as normal, and the PC
who critically fails the Thievery check also triggers the trap.

3
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121915

161

18833969

4121916

4121916


Gamemastery Guide

5 Awareness Points: Suspicions are raised. Increase the
DCs for obstacles by 1. The first time the PCs reach this
tier, a complication occurs.
10 Awareness Points: The first time the PCs reach this
tier, a complication occurs.
15 Awareness Points: Increase the DCs for obstacles by
a total of 2, and the first time the PCs reach this tier, a
complication occurs.
20 Awareness Points: The infiltration fails.

COMPLICATIONS
Sometimes when a plan goes sour and seems like it can’t
get worse, it does. Complications are unexpected problems
that compound the difficulty of a challenge. The party
might trigger a complication by critically failing a check
to overcome a challenge, by reaching a certain threshold of
Awareness Points, if you need to spice up the infiltration,
or through their own decisions—maybe the wizard’s castle
has various wards, each triggered when a PC attempts to
use a different kind of magic.
Many complications increase Awareness Points or
otherwise make infiltration more difficult. A common form
of complication is attracting the attention of guards who try
to stop, capture, or even kill the PCs. When this happens, the
infiltration may briefly shift into encounter mode as the PCs
attempt to defeat their assailants—hopefully taking care not
to arouse more suspicions. The sounds of battle are loud,
so unless combat occurs in an isolated area or the PCs take
precautions, each round of unmitigated combat noise causes
them to gain Awareness Points, at the very least.
When you create a complication, decide on the details
of how it will play out. Each complication has a trigger
that determines when it occurs. It might affect only a
single character, or it might affect everyone in a certain
area, and you’ll need to determine whether multiple PCs
can work together to overcome it or whether only one can.
Complications must be overcome before the characters
involved can overcome other obstacles, and attempting
to overcome a complication takes a character’s turn just
like trying to overcome an obstacle. Many complications
are one-off events and are overcome automatically, even
on a failure, though not without a cost. If a complication
requires PCs to gain Infiltration Points to clear it, it has an
Infiltration Points entry, just like an obstacle.
Don’t overwhelm the characters with complications.
Typically, you’ll want to aim for two complications per AP
threshold. Otherwise, the PCs may end up spending more
time on the complications than on the heist itself, and the
chance of failure may be too high.
The following example is a common complication that
could occur in almost any infiltration.

18833970

18833970

DO I KNOW YOU?

COMPLICATION

Trigger The PCs reach 5 Awareness Points for the first time.
Overcome standard, hard, or very hard Deception, Diplomacy,
Performance, or Stealth

Someone thinks they recognize you, and you must either
convince them otherwise before slipping away or find a way
to dodge the person entirely.
Success You convince or otherwise dodge the person.
Failure You are recognized, and the party accrues 1 AP.
Critical Failure As failure, but the party accrues 2 AP.

OPPORTUNITIES
Not everything that happens during an infiltration is a
challenge that must be solved—sometimes PCs can use
their turns to aid the group in some way. Opportunities are
very similar to obstacles, but they don’t provide Infiltration
Points or count toward the objective. They instead provide
some kind of benefit, such as a magical password to
disable security features further along, reducing the party’s
Awareness Points, or lowering the DC for a later challenge.
But opportunities sometimes come with risks—failing can
increase the PCs’ Awareness Points or trigger complications.
You’ll need to decide what opportunities are available and
when, and whether they can be completed multiple times
or only once. For example, the PCs can steal the guard’s
keys only once, but can cause a distraction several times.
Some opportunities might be available at almost any
time in any infiltration, like this example.

SMOOTH THE PATH

OPPORTUNITY

Requirements The PC has successfully completed an individual
objective and some other PCs have not.
Having completed your objective, you help an ally who is
still trying to reach that goal. Describe how you are helping.
This gives the ally the benefits of Following the Expert (Core
Rulebook 479). In unusual cases, the GM might allow you to
attempt a relevant skill check to overcome the obstacle on
behalf of the other PC instead.

4121916

PC PREPARATIONS

Sometimes the party has a chance to prepare before
conducting their infiltration, by scouting a location,
bribing officials, and so on. This takes the form of special
downtime activities that can give the PCs Edge Points
(EP): resources and advantages they can bring to bear
during their infiltration, such as stolen uniforms, forged
documents, and the like. As with infiltration opportunities,
careless work runs the risk of increasing Awareness
Points—but in this case, before the infiltration even begins!
Typically, you’ll limit the preparation phase in some way,
such as by setting a number of days the PCs have to prepare
and by constraining how many preparation activities
are available to make sure the PCs aren’t entering the
infiltration with so many Edge Points that the infiltration
is no longer suspenseful. The more opportunities for Edge
Points you give, the lower you should set the Awareness
Point thresholds for complications and failure. Also decide
how many times the characters can benefit from each
preparation activity—most activities should grant their
benefits only once.

162

18833970

4121917

4121917

18833971

18833971


Subsystems

You can use the activities below for your infiltration by
adjusting the details, but you should also create custom
activities that link directly to your story.

EDGE POINTS
Edge Points (EP) represent advantages the party gains
by proper planning, quick thinking, the intervention of
an ally, or some other benefit. They are typically gained
by pursuing opportunities in previous infiltrations or
through preparation before the infiltration. When a PC
fails or critically fails a check to overcome an obstacle or
a complication, they can spend an Edge Point to succeed
instead. Some Edge Points can be spent only during
particular circumstances—for instance, no matter how well
you forge documents, it won’t help you unlock a door—so
consider using unique tokens to represent such Edge Points.

BUILDING AN INFILTRATION
For most infiltrations, you’ll want to detail the site
or group the PCs are trying to infiltrate. This might
involve mapping a building or fleshing out NPCs within
the organization—or, most likely, both. You likely need
to know the party’s objectives before you can decide
on these details, but knowing this information can
help you brainstorm the obstacles, opportunities, and
complications of the infiltration itself. Also, with details
on the site and its adversaries, you can more confidently
improvise when the PCs do something unexpected!

PREPARATION ACTIVITIES
BRIBE CONTACT

GOSSIP

SECRET

DOWNTIME

You seek out rumors about the infiltration’s target. Attempt a
normal, hard, or very hard Diplomacy check.
Critical Success You gain inside information about the
location or group you’re trying to infiltrate. This grants you
a +2 circumstance bonus to future checks you attempt for
preparation activities for this infiltration. If you share this
information, those you share it with also gain this bonus.
Success You gain inside information about the place or group
you’re attempting to infiltrate that aids your planning.
Failure You learn nothing.
Critical Failure You hear a few mistaken rumors and take a –2
circumstance penalty to your next check for a preparation
activity. Word spreads around that you’re asking after that
group or individual, increasing your Awareness Points by 1.

FORGE DOCUMENTS

SCOUT LOCATION

SECRET

DOWNTIME

Tools
Subsystems

NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121917

SECRET

You prepare forgeries that might serve as convincing props.
Attempt a hard or very hard Society check.
Success You create convincing forgeries and gain 1 EP you can
use only when presenting some form of paperwork.
Failure You create unconvincing documents. You gain 1 EP
that (unknown to you) grants no benefit when used.
Critical Failure As a failure, but a PC who tries to use the Edge
Point gets a critical failure, even if they use the Edge Point
after rolling a failure.

You spend time observing the place or group you wish to
infiltrate. Attempt a normal, hard, or very hard DC Perception,
Society or Stealth check.
Success You make observations that provide 1 EP.
Failure You learn nothing particularly noteworthy.
Critical Failure You misjudge some aspect of what you
observed, gaining 1 EP that results in a critical failure
instead of a success when used, even if a PC uses the Edge
Point after rolling a failure.

GAIN CONTACT

SECURE DISGUISES

DOWNTIME

Gamemastery
Basics

SECRET

Cost A bribe worth at least one-tenth of the Currency per
Additional PC listed on Table 10–9: Party Treasure by Level
(Core Rulebook 509). Doubling this amount grants a +2
circumstance bonus to the check.
Requirements You’ve successfully Gained a Contact (see below).
You offer a bribe to your contact to help the heist in some way.
Attempt a hard or very hard Deception or Diplomacy check.
Success The contact accepts the bribe and you gain 1 EP.
Failure You believe you successfully Bribed your Contact and
gained 1 EP, but in fact the contact informs the opposition of
the attempted bribery, adding 1 AP to the infiltration. The GM
can reveal that this Edge Point grants no benefit at any point
during the infiltration, as befits the story.
Critical Failure As failure, but adding 2 AP to the infiltration.

DOWNTIME

introduction

Variant Rules
Critical Failure You insult or spook the contact in some way.
Future attempts take a –2 circumstance penalty.
Special Multiple critical failures might cause the contact to
work against the PCs in some way, likely increasing the
party’s Awareness Points.

DOWNTIME

3

DOWNTIME

You try to make contact with an individual who can aid you
in the infiltration. Attempt a normal, hard, or very hard DC
Diplomacy or Society check, or a check using a Lore skill
appropriate to your prospective contact.
Success You make contact and gain 1 EP.
Failure You fail to make contact.

You seek to procure or create disguises. Attempt a normal,
hard, or very hard Crafting, Deception, Performance, or
Society check.
Success You procure or creates disguises, gaining 1 EP that
can be used only to maintain a cover identity.
Failure Your efforts result in an unusable disguise.

163

18833971

4121918

4121918


Gamemastery Guide

REPUTATION

Sometimes it’s crucial to know how groups of people feel about the PCs. That’s where
reputation comes into play. The reputation subsystem is a simple way to use Victory Points
to determine how the PCs stand with such groups.
Reputation is a mid- to long-term subsystem wherein
the PCs accumulate or lose Reputation Points with
a particular group of people, whether it be a guild, a
government, a church, a village, or anything else you can
think of. The PCs gain Reputation Points by performing
favors for the organization, to a maximum of 50
Reputation Points, and lose Reputation Points by doing
disservices, to a minimum of –50 Reputation Points.

FAVORS

Each favor the PCs perform for a group normally grants
the PCs Reputation Points with that group.
• Minor favors are simple, basic tasks that don’t take
too much effort for a PC to perform or much time at
the table. Minor favors grant 1 Reputation Point.
• Moderate favors require a significant amount of
effort and often take up a session or a noticeable
chunk of a single session to complete. Moderate
favors grant 2 Reputation Points.
• Major favors are a sizable endeavor, typically an
entire quest involving several sessions. Major favors
grant 5 Reputation Points.

18833972

18833972

DISSERVICES

On the flip side, disservices are a catchall for ways the
PCs might make a group angry, whether it’s through
actual malice and planning on the PCs’ part or simply by
accident. Unlike favors, disservices don’t have as easy a
correspondence with in-game time; a quick but particularly
egregious action could easily still be a major disservice.
Disservices normally lose the PCs Reputation Points.
• Minor disservices could be small but significant
missteps, or accumulated slights and inconveniences.
Minor disservices take away 1 Reputation Point.
• Moderate disservices are more than just a nuisance
or annoyance, generally significantly hindering the
group’s efforts or violating a fundamental tenet of the
group’s beliefs in a significant but not egregious way.
Moderate disservices take away 2 Reputation Points.

• Major disservices are incredibly antagonistic to a
group, usually a single brazen act, such as thwarting a
cabal’s apocalyptic doomsday plan. Major disservices
take away at least 5 Reputation Points, or more if they
are particularly egregious. They might be so terrible
that the PCs immediately lose all their Reputation
Points and then lose 5 more Reputation Points.

REPUTATIONS

PCs generally start with a reputation of “ignored” with
most groups, as most groups have never heard of them.
If they are particularly famous or infamous among related
groups, the PCs might start at a different reputation of
your choice. The reputation is generalized to the whole
group—an individual NPC can hold a different opinion.

IGNORED
The PCs either aren’t on this group’s radar or the group
knows about the PCs but is generally ambivalent to them.
This is the default for most PCs with most groups, and it
carries no special benefits or detriments.

4121918

LIKED
The PCs have gained this group’s favor. Many members
of the group know about the PCs, and those who do
are usually friendly to them. At this reputation, only
moderate and major favors accrue Reputation Points; it
takes more to impress the group further.

ADMIRED
The PCs have earned this group’s admiration. The majority
of the group knows about the PCs and have an extremely
favorable opinion toward them. Many members of the
group are helpful toward the PCs, and those who aren’t are
friendly. Only major favors accrue Reputation Points.

REVERED
The group reveres the PCs as heroes and celebrities. Every
member has heard of the PCs, is helpful toward them, and

TABLE 3–2: REPUTATIONS
Reputation
Revered
Admired
Liked
Ignored
Disliked
Hated
Hunted

Reputation Points
30 to 50
15 to 29
5 to 14
–4 to 4
–5 to –14
–15 to –29
–30 to –50

Raised By
Major favor
Major favor
Moderate or major favor
Any favor
Any favor
Any favor
Moderate or major favor

Lowered By
Moderate or major disservice
Any disservice
Any disservice
Any disservice
Moderate or major disservice
Major disservice
Major disservice

164

18833972

4121919

4121919


Subsystems

3
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18833973

18833973

4121919

would take major risks to assist them. Only major favors
accrue Reputation Points, and only moderate or major
disservices can reduce them.

DISLIKED
The PCs have a poor reputation among members of
this group. Many members of the group know about
the PCs, and are usually unfriendly to them. At this
reputation, only moderate and major disservices reduce
Reputation Points.

HATED
The PCs have earned this group’s ire. The vast majority
of the group knows about the PCs and have an extremely
unfavorable opinion toward them. Many members of the
group are hostile toward the PCs, and those who aren’t are
unfriendly. When presented an easy opportunity to hurt
the PCs, the group will jump at the chance. Only major
disservices can still reduce Reputation Points.

HUNTED
The group actively hunts the PCs as scapegoats or
nemeses, even at significant cost to itself. Every member
has heard of the PCs, is hostile toward them, and would
take major risks to thwart or destroy them. Only major
disservices can still reduce Reputation Points, and only
moderate or major favors can increase them.

RUNNING REPUTATION

Using Reputation Points in the background allows you to
track the PCs’ status with a variety of groups or factions
in your campaign based on the PCs’ actions and choices.
This is especially useful for a sandbox campaign or other
structure with numerous possibilities, helping you build
a reactive structure and track how PCs are doing with
groups they interact with only occasionally. When the
point totals don’t fit the story, use common sense. For
instance, if the PCs are hunted by the town guard due to a
corrupt mayor, but then perform a major quest revealing
the mayor’s wrongdoing and saving the town, that might
jump them from the worst negative reputation to a much
more positive reputation. Similarly, the PCs’ foes could
frame them, harming the PCs’ reputation though they’ve
done no disservice.

REPUTATION IN PATHFINDER SOCIETY
ORGANIZED PLAY
Pathfinder Society Organized Play uses a version of the
reputation subsystem with various factions to offer unique
benefits for different characters, with different Reputation
Point thresholds that adapted to the Organized Play
structure. Check it out for inspiration for reputation in your
own game!

165

18833973

4121920

4121920


Gamemastery Guide

DUELS

Sometimes conflicts become personal. It’s not the entire group against a challenge, but one
character struggling against the skills of a single adversary. In many societies, duels are
considered a reasonable way to resolve individual differences, though others consider such
practices—especially the more deadly varieties—to be a savage affront to law and order.
Duels can come in several forms, and this section gives you rules to run them.

SETTING UP A DUEL

Participants must willingly agree to the duel and to abide
by its rules. If one of the duelists breaks the duel’s rules
(and, more importantly, is caught doing so), that duelist
loses, taking any penalties agreed upon when the challenge
was accepted. Here are some sample dueling rules.

COMPETE ALONE
It’s customary that each participant must compete
alone and may receive no help from outside sources.
However, some duels pit pairs of combatants against
one another (either all together or as tag teams).

LIMITED TOOLS
The participants agree to the tools, including weapons
and magic items, before the duel starts. Most combat
duels that don’t involve magic limit participants to
melee weapons and prohibit the use of poison. Some duels
forbid the use of polearms and other reach weapons. A
spellcasting duel might agree upon a roughly equal number
of magic items, and a cap on the power (in game terms, the
level) of the items. Some spellcasting duels might prohibit
certain types of spells, such as summoning or necromancy.

18833974

18833974

4121920

DURATION
Combat duels typically last either until first blood (hitting
and dealing damage) or until one of the duelists is knocked
out. Most duels allow a participant to yield, which means
they concede victory to their opponent, though sometimes
this could diminish their social standing. Duels of talent
usually involve several equal turns in which the duelists
display their ability.

ADJUDICATION
Most duels are overseen by a third party who ensures the
duelists don’t break the duel’s rules—inadvertently or by
cheating. Where duels are legal, this is typically a constable
or magistrate. In other places, a cleric or other respected
figure serves as judge. Typically the GM plays the judge.

COMBAT DUELS

Unlike the other subsystems in this chapter, a combat duel
works almost the same as a normal combat encounter,
with a few exceptions. These rules require exceptional
focus between two duelists and a third-party arbiter, and
thus are not available in a normal combat.

166

18833974

4121921

4121921

18833975

18833975


Subsystems

INITIATIVE AND DUELING ACTIONS
Unlike in typical combat, the duelists roll initiative checks
at the beginning of each round of combat. Each round the
combatant can choose to use Deception, Intimidation, or
Perception when they roll initiative. Because a duelist might
act twice in a row, durations that last until the beginning of
a duelist’s next turn might function oddly. A duelist acting
second can choose to avoid such abilities that turn, or can
choose to act second if they win initiative on the next round.
If the duelist is at least trained in whichever initiative
choice they pick, they gain the corresponding dueling
reaction that round: Bullying Press for Intimidation,
Deceptive Sidestep for Deception, or Sense Weakness
for Perception. Neither duelist is aware of what type of
roll the other used for initiative—surprise and the use of
dueling actions are a part of dueling strategies. Familiars
and companions, even when allowed in the duel, can’t use
these actions, nor can bystanders.

BULLYING PRESS [reaction]
FLOURISH

Trigger You attempt a melee Strike against your opponent, but
haven’t rolled yet.
Requirements You’re in a duel, you’re trained in Intimidation,
and you rolled an Intimidation check for initiative this round.
If you hit, your opponent becomes frightened 1. If your
opponent is using Perception for initiative when this ability is
used, they become frightened 2 instead.

DECEPTIVE SIDESTEP [reaction]
MISFORTUNE

Trigger An opponent hits, but does not critically hit you, with
a melee Strike.
Requirements You’re in a duel, you’re trained in Deception, and
you rolled a Deception check for initiative this round.
You draw your enemy in and pull away at the last moment.
The triggering opponent must roll again and take the second
result. If your opponent is using Intimidation for initiative
when this ability is used, they also take a –2 circumstance
penalty to the second attack roll.

SENSE WEAKNESS [reaction]
Trigger You attempt a melee Strike against your opponent, but
haven’t rolled yet.
Requirements You’re in a duel, you’re trained in Perception,
and you rolled a Perception check for initiative this round.
You pick a precise moment to attack, giving you an edge. Your
opponent is flat-footed against the attack. If your opponent is
using Deception for initiative when this ability is used, they
are instead flat-footed until the start of their next turn.

ENDING THE DUEL
The duel ends when the duel’s judge confirms the victory
condition, when the judge determines one of the duelists
has cheated, or when one of the duelists yields. Note that
if either of the combatants attempts to continue the duel

3

after its end, the combatants should roll initiative and
proceed with normal combat.

introduction

SPELLCASTING DUELS

Gamemastery
Basics

Like combat duels, spellcasting duels take place in
encounter mode, but their rules are not available during
normal combat. They are typically more organized affairs
than combat duels. Many spellcasting duels prohibit any
sort of combat but spellcasting. They typically have the
duelists take turns casting a turn’s worth of spells, giving
their rivals a chance to counter the spells if they can.

INITIATIVE AND DUELING ACTIONS
In most cases, each duelist rolls initiative normally and
proceeds in that initiative order throughout the duel, unlike
in a combat duel. Each duelist can roll an Arcana, Nature,
Occultism, or Religion check instead of Perception. If they
are trained at that skill, they gain the tradition focus of that
skill, which allows them to hone in on a certain magical
school corresponding to the check they made for their
initiative roll. They also gain the Dueling Counter reaction,
which enables a duelist to counter their opponent’s spell
if their tradition focus matches the tradition of that spell.
They also gain the Change Tradition Focus action, which
changes the duelist’s tradition focus to a different tradition.
Familiars and companions, even when allowed in the duel,
can’t use these actions, nor can bystanders.
When mixing a spellcasting duel and a combat duel,
use the initiative rules for combat dueling, but allow the
duelist to roll Arcana, Nature, Occultism, or Religion for
their initiative checks. They still gain the Dueling Counter
reaction and Change Tradition Focus action, though Change
Tradition Focus is less useful in combat duels.

Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121921

DUELING COUNTER [reaction]
MAGICAL

Trigger Your opponent Casts a Spell from the same tradition as
your tradition focus.
Requirements You are in a duel and have a tradition focus.
Expend a prepared spell or spell slot. You then attempt to
counteract the triggering spell with the expended spell.

CHANGE TRADITION FOCUS [one-action]
Requirements You are in a duel and are trained in the skill for
the tradition you’re changing your focus to (Arcana for arcane,
Occultism for occult, Nature for primal, or Religion for divine).
You change your tradition focus to another magical tradition.

ENDING THE DUEL
Just like a combat duel, a spellcasting duel ends when
the duel’s judge confirms the victory condition, when the
judge determines one of the duelists has cheated, or when
one of the duelists yields. As with a combat duel, if either
of the combatants attempts to continue the duel after its
end, the combatants should roll initiative and proceed
with normal combat.

167

18833975

4121922

4121922


Gamemastery Guide

LEADERSHIP

While many groups of PCs are isolated heroes who get the job done on their own, other
groups enjoy gathering allies and building new organizations of their own. The leadership
subsystem allows your PCs to do just that!
Leadership is a long-term subsystem wherein one or more
PCs establish a fledgling organization and accumulate
followers over time. This subsystem provides a flexible
way to reflect the party’s growing influence in and
connection to the world around them through downtime
events and periodic benefits similar to those gained
from joining an existing in-world organization. The
organization can come into play only during downtime,
or it can provide adventure seeds or even play a major
role in a campaign.

ORGANIZATION LEVELS

Every organization has a level from 1 to 20. Any
organization below level 1 has no followers; it’s just an
ordinary group of PCs. Unlike many other subsystems in
this chapter, leveling up an organization in the leadership
subsystem does not involve accumulating points. Instead,
the process of growing the organization itself is what
causes it to level up! As a reward for quests, roleplaying
scenes, or succeeding at other subsystems (particularly
influence or reputation), the PCs can add an NPC follower
to their organization. At first, only a few level 0 NPCs
follow the PCs, but as the party builds up more followers,
they can also gain followers of higher and higher level, as
well as a small number of higher-level lieutenants to lead
groups of followers. Once an organization has recruited
enough followers, the organization itself levels up, which
increases the maximum level of followers, the number of
lieutenants, and the level range of those lieutenants.

18833976

18833976

TABLE 3–3: ORGANIZATION STATISTICS BY LEVEL
		Max Follower		Lieutenant
Level Followers
Level
Lieutenants Levels
1
1–2
0
—
—
2
3–4
0
—
—
3
5–6
0
1
1
4
7–9
0
1
1
5
10–13
0
1
1
6
14–18
1
2
2
7
19–27
1
2
2
8
28–36
1
3
2–3
9
37–53
1
4–5
2–3
10
54–75
2
6–7
3–4
11
76–99
2
8–10
3–4
12
100–150
2
11–15
3–5
13
151–215
2
16–22
3–5
14
216–300
3
23–30
4–6
15
301–425
3
31–42
4–6
16
426–600
3
43–60
4–7

17
18
19
20

601–850
851–1,200
1,201–1,700
1,701–2,400

3
4
4
4

61–85
86–120
121–170
171–240

4–7
5–8
5–8
5–9

BASE OF OPERATIONS

Beyond the very smallest organizations, PCs need some
kind of base of operations the organization calls home.
This allows the organization to function and grow in its
intended role. For instance, if the PCs run a mercenary
army, it might have a keep for training and as a base
for defending the nearby area. While organizations
usually gain a base of operations early in their existence,
they must have one by 6th level unless the story of the
organization demands otherwise. A base of operations is
not necessarily immobile; a caravan, circus, or flagship
(or fleet, for a larger organization) could serve well for
wandering organizations.

ORGANIZATION NPCS

Followers and lieutenants are noncombatant NPCs of the
levels indicated on Table 3–3: Organization Statistics by
Level. When an organization has followers or lieutenants
of several levels, most of them are at the lowest possible
level. As a rule of thumb, an organization has twice as
many NPCs of a given level than of the next-higher level.
This allows you to quickly estimate the level composition
of the organization’s members, but you can of course
change the levels of various followers as much as you like.
When the minimum level for lieutenants increases, either
the lower-level lieutenants level up to the new minimum,
or they become followers of more powerful lieutenants
the PCs recruit, whichever fits best with the story.
Followers and lieutenants are loyal to the PCs and their
organization, working to maintain the organization, its
base of operations, and their own way of life. Because
of this work, PCs don’t need to pay for basic upkeep of
their base of operations or for expansions to house the
burgeoning activity as their organization grows in level—
the followers and lieutenants take care of all of that.
But similarly, these followers and lieutenants never get
involved in the PCs’ adventuring, nor do they provide a
source of free magic or labor.

4121922

COHORTS AND NEW PCS
While the followers and lieutenants who define an
organization’s advancement don’t accompany the PCs on
adventures, sometimes the organization is the perfect plot
hook to introduce an NPC who will be traveling along

168

18833976

4121923

4121923


Subsystems

3
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18833977

18833977

4121923

with the party or a new PC hoping to join the party. For
instance, if the PCs are running a mercenary army, a rising
officer might become a new PC. Treat such NPC cohorts
and PCs just like any other additional characters in the
party, with an enriched story that ties them to the PCs.

RUNNING LEADERSHIP

When running a game with the leadership subsystem,
adding new NPCs who join the PCs’ cause becomes a type
of reward you should grant the PCs consistently throughout
the campaign. For a typical rate of growth, give the PCs
enough followers for the organization to level up at roughly
the same rate as the PCs. In some cases, you might want
to vary that rate—sometimes drastically. Perhaps the
10th-level PCs have a 20th-level organization with top
lieutenants nearly as powerful as the PCs, or maybe the PCs
start gathering followers only at 15th level and start their
organization from scratch as a 1st-level organization.

LEADERSHIP EVENTS
During downtime, or over the course of long stretches
of time when the PCs aren’t in downtime but their
organization is operating in the background, you should
periodically provide special leadership events. These are
in addition to the events you would normally provide the
PCs during downtime. These should generally be a good
mix between the following three categories.

Opportunity: An opportunity offers the PCs a chance to
steer the ship for their organization by making a decision
that shapes the organization moving forward, with
consequences generally ranging from neutral to a mix of
good and bad. For instance, the Aspis Consortium offers
the PCs a deal to store their goods in the PCs’ mercenary
fort. Accepting gives the PCs money, but they’ll have to
deal with the consortium’s unsavory goods. Rejecting the
proposal might upset the consortium, but it allows the PCs
to show their priorities between conscience and coin.
Trouble: Something’s gone wrong with the organization,
requiring the PCs’ attention or assistance to solve. Perhaps
the thieves’ guild is dealing with a clever new guard
captain and needs help from the PCs to stay safe. Typically
the resources the PCs need to invest to solve the troubles
should be less than the benefits the PCs gain from windfalls
to ensure that the organization is providing a substantial
benefit to the PCs, rather than simply evening out.
Windfall: The organization has received an unexpected
benefit that helps the PCs. This is typically access to an
uncommon option: perhaps the organization researched a
new spell or discovered the techniques for an uncommon
feat. However, it could be extra money or resources, clues
for the PCs’ adventures, political prestige, or anything else
you can think of. The players might even be able to suggest
a few options for their followers and lieutenants to work
toward to give you some ideas.

169

18833977

4121924

4121924


Gamemastery Guide

HEXPLORATION

Few activities epitomize adventure as much as pure exploration through an unknown
wilderness. Leaving the city streets and trade roads behind and striking out into the
unknown can test the mettle of the most experienced adventurers, but such efforts reward
those seeking fantastical sites, natural resources, and unforeseen opportunities.
While you can represent long, heroic journeys using
normal exploration, if you want something more detailed,
you can use the hexploration subsystem instead. This is a
method where the overland map is divided into individual
hexagonal sections of territory. During their exploration,
the PCs travel through and explore individual hexes,
finding interesting sites, secrets, resources, and dangers.
The pace of travel is measured in days rather than
hours or minutes. This means choosing hexploration
activities are more akin to choosing downtime activities
than exploration activities. Each day, the PCs explore or
travel through a region of the wilderness measured in
hexes on a map to survey, discover resources, forage, find
sites, and reconnoiter potential foes and allies.
Hexploration is ideal for sandbox-style campaigns,
where the players are at liberty to set the course of
their own adventure. The GM populates a region with
interesting locations and situations that the players
explore in any order they see fit.
18833978

18833978

DESIGNING A
HEXPLORATION MAP

The best way to map the area is with a hex grid. Each hex
represents a discreet area 12 miles from corner to corner,
which can be traveled across and explored in about 1 day
even by slower-moving groups. Hexes track the distance
the party travels while exploring and define the bounds of
certain types of terrain.
When designing your hex map, it’s best to have each
hex represent one primary terrain type. This doesn’t
mean that’s the only feature of the land in this hex, but it
is the predominant type and represents the challenges of
traveling across and exploring that hex. You can also give
your hex other elements: a river or a road might snake
through the area, or it could contain a castle, cave, village,
fort, or some other type of encounter setting. You can
quickly draw your map using just a few colors, some basic
symbols, and letters or numbers for reference.
But this is only the start. This detailed map is your GM
map, holding all the secrets for the PCs to discover. Give
the players a blank map that they can fill in as they explore
the wilderness hex by hex. The more they explore, the
more their map will look like yours.

POPULATING HEXES
When populating a hexploration map, keep in mind that
you have little control over which areas the players choose
to explore first—or if they’ll explore those areas at all.

Because hexploration leads to nonlinear, player‑guided
play, consider providing hooks within encounters and sites
for them to explore in several directions from their starting
point. You can provide some direction by presenting
jobs like exploring a site on behalf of an NPC, escorting
travelers, delivering goods, or scouting a region for a local
noble. This typically leads to a set encounter (see below).

Set Encounters
Even a sandbox adventure has a story or is the setting
of multiple stories. Set encounters, be they just a simple
encounter or an entire adventuring site, can serve as
important beats in the story behind the PCs’ exploration.
These are typically the points on the hex maps the PCs are
searching for, and the discovery of one set encounter will
often incorporate story points that lead to the next.

Random Encounters
You can instill additional danger into your hexploration by
including random encounters, whether they take the form
of interesting features, natural hazards, or creatures native
to the terrain. It can help to create a series of short lists in
advance, each including a mix of three types of encounters:
harmless, hazards, and creature encounters. Then create
tables to randomize the results, or simply pick whichever
encounter you think would work best for your hexploration
narrative when these encounters occur (as described in
Random Encounters on page 173). It’s often easier to create
a list by terrain rather than for each hex. The forest hexes
could have their own random encounter list while the plains
beyond have a different list, possibly with some overlap.
A harmless encounter is just that: the party is in no
danger from it. Harmless encounters can be opportunities
to flesh out the world with interesting bits of set-dressing,
like a shrine on the side of the road dedicated to a minor
god, opportunities for the party to interact with other
travelers, or simply interesting or noteworthy moments on
the road, like a distant and dazzling electrical storm.
Hazard encounters can include those located in the
Hazards section on pages 520–529 of the Core Rulebook
and pages 77–81 of this book, primarily the environmental
hazards and haunts. You can also create your own hazards
using the rules found in Building Hazards on page 74.
Creature encounters can use the creatures found in
the Bestiary, or you can create your own using the rules
found in Building Creatures on page 56.
Plan your hazard and monster encounters with a
degree of flexibility so you can tailor them to the PCs’

4121924

170

18833978

4121925

4121925


Subsystems

3
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18833979

18833979

4121925

current level, perhaps by creating a lower-level encounter
and including notes on how to scale it up. Alternatively,
if you want to run a more challenging or open-world
hexploration, don’t adapt to your players at all. Make a
variety of encounters, some of which are so powerful that
the correct tactic is to flee. You can even create a chase to
make the escape exciting (see Chases on page 156).

Terrain
While each hex should have a predominant terrain type,
your terrain can come alive using the info in the Environment
section on pages 512–519 of the Core Rulebook. A hex
might also include a river or road. These can cut through
the terrain, making it easier for the PCs to travel through
the hex, so long as they follow the path. Additionally, each
hex might have special features like resources and secrets
(see the Types of Terrain sidebar on page 172).

GENERATING RANDOM HEX MAPS
If you’d like to create your map randomly, begin by
selecting a hex on a blank map as the starting point. Then
decide the type of terrain for that starting point or roll
it on Table 3–4: Random Terrain Type. From that point
onward, let the players decide which direction they travel.
If they enter an unexplored hex, generate that hex by
rolling 1d20 on Table 3–4 and Table 3–5: Random Terrain
Feature to determine a type and element for that hex.

Apply common sense when producing terrain in this way.
Unless magic is involved, it is unlikely a patch of arctic ice
would appear in the heart of a desert—though figuring
out a way for that to occur could lead to an interesting
encounter or subplot later on.

TABLE 3–4: RANDOM TERRAIN TYPE
1d20
1–3
4–5
6–7
8–9
10–11
12
13
14–20

Result
Plains
Desert
Aquatic (lake, sea, or ocean)
Mountain
Forest
Swamp
Arctic
Match the previous hex

TABLE 3–5: RANDOM TERRAIN FEATURE
1d20
1–3
4–6
7–9
10–20

Result
Landmark A feature of some significance that
distinguishes the hex as noteworthy.
Secret The hex contains a secret the party
uncovers upon exploring the hex.
Resource The hex contains some valuable resource
appropriate to the terrain.
Standard A standard representation of the
terrain type.

171

18833979

4121926

4121926


Gamemastery Guide

TYPES OF TERRAIN
The following are examples of the types of terrain you can
use when creating your hexploration map. Each section
provides the difficulty of traversing that terrain (either
open, difficult, or greater difficult terrain) and the potential
resources and secrets found there.

AQUATIC
Terrain typically requires a boat or a swim speed; depends
on the strengths of currents and the weather
Resources seafood, coral, pearls, shipwrecks
Secrets remote islands filled with monsters, isolated
communities, pirates, flooded or underwater cities of
aquatic creatures

ARCTIC
Terrain typically difficult or greater difficult terrain
Resources scarce food (broken ice floes that allow for
fishing, breeding grounds for seals or whales)
Secret thawed passes that allow ship travel, hidden caverns,
isolated communities of arctic dwellers

DESERT
Terrain typically difficult or greater difficult terrain
Resources water sources (underground springs, oases, and
streams), mineral wealth
Secrets forgotten civilizations beneath the dunes
18833980

18833980

FOREST
Terrain typically difficult terrain, or greater difficult terrain
for a dense jungle
Resources diverse flora and fauna, natural remedies,
plentiful game
Secrets bandit encampment, druid’s henge, fey-touched
glade or mushroom circle

MOUNTAIN
Terrain typically greater difficult terrain, or difficult terrain
for hills
Resources minerals (including gold, silver, and gemstones)
Secrets hidden pass, watchtower or waypoint constructed
by a nearby empire, dragon’s lair, bandit hideout

PLAIN
Terrain open terrain
Resources useful plants (flax or cotton)
Secrets artifacts abandoned after a historic battle, valuables
buried by outlaws for later retrieval

SWAMP
Terrain typically greater difficult terrain
Resources materials useful for medicine or poison
Secrets river raider camps, remains and gear of unlucky
travelers, sites of mystic significance

RUNNING HEXPLORATION

Once you have your hexploration map ready, it’s time
for the PCs to start exploring! Each day, the PCs decide
how they plan on exploring, either learning more about
their current hex or traversing a new hex. They do this by
declaring one or more hexploration activities for the day.
These activities take two forms: group or individual. The
number of hexploration activities a group can accomplish
each day is based on the Speed of their slowest member. If
a group is willing to split up, faster members can perform
more hexploration activities based on their own Speed, but
such a decision may be deadly given the threat of random
encounters. A group moving at a Speed of 10 feet or less is
so slow it can’t even traverse an open hex in a single day;
it takes such a group 2 days for each hexploration activity.

TABLE 3–6: HEXPLORATION ACTIVITIES PER DAY
Speed
10 feet or less
15–25 feet
30–40 feet
45–55 feet
60 feet or more

Activities per Day
1/2
1
2
3
4

This rate assumes the PCs are taking time to camp and
rest at healthy intervals. When a new day of hexploration
begins, the group can decide to take a forced march as long
as no one in the group is fatigued. Doing so allows them
to gain an extra Travel activity (or perform a full Travel
activity each day if their Speed is 10 feet or less), but this
is the only activity they can perform that day. A character
can participate in a forced march safely for a number
of days equal to the character’s Constitution modifier
(minimum 1 day). Any additional days of forced march
make the character fatigued until they spend an entire day
of downtime resting.

4121926

GROUP ACTIVITIES
Group activities require the entire party to work together
in order to be effective; these activities each count as one of
the day’s hexploration activities for the whole group. For
instance, if the group had 2 hexploration activities per day
and decided to Travel and Reconnoiter, no one would have
any additional hexploration activities that day. There are
two group activities: Travel and Reconnoiter.

TRAVEL
MOVE

You progress toward moving into an adjacent hex. In open
terrain, like a plain, using 1 Travel activity allows you to
move from one hex to an adjacent hex. Traversing a hex with
difficult terrain (such as a typical forest or desert) requires 2
Travel activities, and hexes of greater difficult terrain (such as
a steep mountain or typical swamp) require 3 Travel activities
to traverse. Traveling along a road uses a terrain type one
step better than the surrounding terrain. For example, if you

172

18833980

4121927

4121927

18833981

18833981


Subsystems

are traveling on a road over a mountain pass, the terrain is
difficult terrain instead of greater difficult terrain.
The Travel activity assumes you are walking overland. If you
are flying or traveling on water, most hexes are open terrain,
though there are exceptions. Flying into storms or high winds
count as difficult or greater difficult terrain. Traveling down a
river is open terrain, but traveling upriver is difficult or greater
difficult terrain.

8 hours or less of exploration. Any skill feats or other
abilities that apply to Subsist normally still apply here.
In general, the various exploration activities found in the
sidebar on page 498 of the Core Rulebook (except Hustle)
can be used as individual hexploration activities, as can
skill actions in Chapter 4 of the Core Rulebook, at the
GM’s discretion.

RECONNOITER

When exploring, there is always a chance the PC will
stumble upon random encounters, depending on the terrain.
At the start of each day of hexploration, roll a flat check and
consult the appropriate terrain type on Table 3–7: Random
Encounter Chance. If the flat check is a success, the PCs have
a random encounter, and on a critical success, they have two
random encounters. Roll on Table 3–8: Random Encounter
Type to determine the type of encounter. Once you know the
type of the encounter, either choose from the list you made
for that region or choose your own.

CONCENTRATION

You spend time surveying and exploring a specific area,
getting the lay of the land and looking for unusual features
and specific sites. Reconnoitering a single hex takes a number
of hexploration activities equal to the number of Travel
activities necessary to traverse the hex—1 for open terrain, 2
for difficult terrain, and 3 for greater difficult terrain. Traveling
on roads doesn’t lessen the time required to Reconnoiter. Once
the hex has been Reconnoitered, you can Map the Area to
reduce your chance of getting lost in that hex (see below). You
automatically find any special feature that doesn’t require a
check to find, and you attempt the appropriate checks to find
hidden special features.
For instance, if you were looking for an obvious rock
formation among some hills, you would spend 2 hexploration
activities to Reconnoiter the hex, and you’d find the rock
formation. But if you were looking for a hidden tengu
monastery somewhere in some deep forests, after spending
2 activities to Reconnoiter the forest hex, you would have to
succeed at a Perception check as part of your Reconnoiter
activity to find the monastery.

INDIVIDUAL ACTIVITIES
Not all hexploration activities need to be accomplished
as a group. In place of using a hexploration activity to
Travel or Reconnoiter, each individual group member can
instead perform one of these individual activities.

FORTIFY CAMP
You can spend time fortifying your camp for defense with
a successful Crafting check (typically at a trained or expert
DC). Anyone keeping watch or defending the camp gains a +2
circumstance bonus to initiative rolls and Perception checks to
Seek creatures attempting to sneak up on the camp.

MAP THE AREA
CONCENTRATION

As long as your group has successfully Reconnoitered the hex,
you can use this activity to create an accurate map of the hex
with a successful Survival check (typically at a trained or expert
DC). When you have an accurate map of the hex, the DC of any
check to navigate that hex is reduced by 2.

Existing Activities
Characters can use the Subsist downtime activity, which
follows the same rules but assumes they’re using it after

3
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools

RANDOM ENCOUNTERS
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

TABLE 3–7: RANDOM ENCOUNTER CHANCE
Terrain Type
Flat Check DC*
Aquatic
17
Arctic
17
Desert
17
Forest
14
Mountain
16
Plains
12
Swamp
14
* On a road or river, decrease the DC by 2. If PCs are flying,
increase the DC by 3, but choose a hazard or monster 		
that is relevant to flying PCs.

4121927

TABLE 3–8: RANDOM ENCOUNTER TYPE
1d10
1–5
6–7
8–10

Encounter
Harmless
Hazard
Creature

SWITCHING OUT OF HEXPLORATION
Most short encounters do not affect the number of
hexploration activities that the PCs can perform during
the day, but when the PCs take on multiple encounters
or engage in activities that take hours rather than
minutes, you’ll want to deduct the time from their
available hexploration activities. For the story’s sake,
it’s best to think of hexploration activities as the various
things that the PCs have time to do in the daylight
hours. For instance, maybe the group spends 2 of their
3 hexploration activities Reconnoitering a hex, finding
a tengu monastery, and learning that it is a sprawling
complex underneath a small wooded hill. You might
decide that the PCs found it in the evening, and they have
the choice between making a foray into the complex late
in the day or pursuing some individual activities, camping
for the night, and starting off fresh in the morning.

173

18833981

4121928

4121928


Gamemastery Guide

VEHICLES

A villain on the run steals a carriage and sends the characters on a chase through the city,
or the characters find an ancient airship and decide to take it for a spin. Whatever the case,
if vehicles are common throughout your world, they’re likely to come up in your game.
This section provides the tools you’ll need when that happens.
Vehicles can play many roles in a game. They might
simply be the means by which the party travels from
one location to another, determining only the Price to be
paid for passage. But a caravan wagon that gets attacked
becomes part of an encounter. In a pirate campaign, the
ship is both the party’s home and its primary weapon.
The majority of the rules in this section are for using
vehicles in encounters, but vehicles are also useful during
exploration and even downtime play.

VEHICLE BASICS

Ultimately, vehicles are objects. They have object
immunities (Core Rulebook 273), and they can’t act. In
addition to the statistics most objects have, vehicles have
several additional statistics and abilities. Vehicles have a
size like any object, but their spaces are more specifically
defined. Vehicles also have specialized movement rules.

SIZE, SPACE, AND CAPACITY
Vehicles have size traits, but they don’t occupy the same
spaces that most creatures use. Instead, each vehicle has
specific dimensions provided in its stat block.
Most vehicles are Large or larger, and many vehicles
are made for the purpose of carrying cargo. Unless
stated otherwise, the amount of cargo a vehicle can carry
depends on its size, terrain, and propulsion. A draft horse
or similar creature can usually pull around 100 Bulk of
goods consistently throughout the day, so pulled vehicles
can typically hold 100 Bulk per Large creature pulling.
Water vehicles, such as ships, have limits that are more
based on volume than weight; a ship can hold upwards of
1,000 Bulk. Flying vehicles can typically hold only 1/10
the Bulk of a water vehicle and still remain airborne.

18833982

18833982

MOVEMENT AND HEADING
A vehicle’s movement type is determined by the vehicle
itself, while its movement each round is based on the
pilot’s actions. Vehicles trigger reactions when they move,
just like a creature does, as do the actions of the pilot and
any passengers.
Creatures can rotate and turn freely, so when you play
a creature, you usually don’t need to keep track of which
way it’s facing. However, vehicles can’t turn on a dime, so
when controlling a vehicle, you need to keep track of which
direction it’s facing. This is called the vehicle’s heading.
When a vehicle moves, it must move in the direction
of its heading—it can’t move backwards or sideways,
though it can turn gradually as it moves forward.

Most vehicles can turn up to 90 degrees for every vehicle
length they move forward. For example, a 10-foot-long
carriage could turn left in only 10 feet. A 100-foot-long
warship, however, would need 100 feet to make the same
turn; given the warship’s 30-foot Speed, turning typically
requires several actions’ worth of movement.
Some rules specify that a vehicle must move in a
straight line. This line is measured from the center of the
vehicle’s front edge, and it can skew up to 45 degrees
from the vehicle’s current heading.
When using a vehicle in exploration mode, the vehicle’s
Speed determines its travel speed just like a creature (for
more information, see Table 9–2: Travel Speed on page
479 of the Core Rulebook). No Drive actions or piloting
checks are necessary to pilot a vehicle at these speeds.

PROPULSION
Vehicles typically travel over land, on water, or through the
air, and their Speeds indicate their terrain and movement
types. But vehicles also have a form of propulsion—the
way in which their movement is powered—and this
propulsion often has additional considerations.
There are five main types of propulsion: alchemical,
magical, pulled, rowed, and wind. A vehicle can have more
than one means of propulsion, though it usually uses only
one type of propulsion at a time. For instance, a galley has
both the rowed and the wind propulsion traits, meaning
it can sail when the winds are favorable, but the crew can
also lower the sails and row the ship when necessary. The
vehicle’s means of propulsion informs the skills a pilot can
use for piloting checks (page 175), and some means of
propulsion have additional rules.

4121928

Alchemical
Powered by the reactions of alchemical reagents, controlled
internal combustion, lighter-than-air gases, or steam,
vehicles with alchemical propulsion tend to be powerful but
have the potential to be wildly unpredictable. Alchemical
vehicles can often be piloted using the Crafting skill.

Magical
Magically propelled vehicles are powered by spells, magic
items, or an entirely magical engine. A magical propulsion
system can be targeted with counteracting effects like
dispel magic, using the vehicle’s level and a standard DC
for that level for the counteract check. A creature can use
Arcana, Nature, Occultism, or Religion (depending on
the type of magic) for a magical vehicle’s piloting checks.

174

18833982

4121929

4121929

18833983

18833983


Subsystems

Pulled
This method of propulsion is perhaps the most common,
wherein a wheeled conveyance (such as a carriage or
wagon) is pulled by one or more creatures. The Speed of
the vehicle can never exceed that of the slowest creature
pulling the vehicle. The creatures pulling the vehicle don’t
act on their own; they instead act as part of the vehicle’s
actions, and their movement as part of those actions
triggers reactions just as it does for the vehicle itself and
its pilot.
When a pulled vehicle takes collision damage, so do the
creatures pulling that vehicle (though they can typically
attempt the basic Reflex saving throw to mitigate that
damage). The death of one or more pulling creatures
might damage or slow the vehicle, and it might cause the
pilot to lose control.
For a vehicle pulled by an animal or similarly
unintelligent creature, a pilot can use Nature for piloting
checks; for sapient pulling creatures, the pilot can instead
use Diplomacy or Intimidation for piloting checks.

Rowed
These vehicles are propelled by the power of creatures
rowing the vehicle from within. The creatures rowing the
vehicle act only as part of the vehicle’s actions, and their
movement as part of those actions triggers reactions just
as it does for the vehicle itself and its pilot (though rowers
often have some degree of cover).
When a rowed vehicle takes collision damage, so do the
creatures rowing that vehicle (though they can typically
attempt the basic Reflex saving throw to mitigate that
damage). The death of one or more creatures might cause
the vehicle to go out of control or slow the vehicle, but
usually doesn’t damage the vehicle.
A pilot on a vehicle rowed by other people can use
Diplomacy or Intimidation for piloting checks.

Wind
Wind-propelled vehicles require some form of air
movement to power them, and adverse wind conditions
can cause them to stall or even go out of control. Wind
vehicles that rely on cloth sails typically have weakness to
fire. Pilots of wind-powered vehicles can use Nature for
piloting checks.

PILOTING A VEHICLE

In encounter mode, a vehicle moves on its pilot’s turn, and
the pilot must use their actions to control it. A vehicle can
take part in only 1 move action each round, even if multiple
creatures Take Control as pilots on the same round.

VEHICLE MOMENTUM
A vehicle in motion builds up momentum that keeps it
in motion. Each round, if the vehicle has moved in the
previous round, the pilot must either use another move
action or Stop the vehicle. If the pilot does neither of

these things on their turn (even if the pilot Delays), the
vehicle continues to move and becomes uncontrolled, as
described in Uncontrolled Vehicles on page 176.

PILOTING CHECKS
Many actions related to vehicles call for the pilot to
attempt a piloting check. The skills a pilot can use for a
piloting check are listed in the vehicle’s stat block, but
most vehicles use Driving Lore or Piloting Lore along
with others determined by their propulsion. The creature
piloting a vehicle when an encounter begins can usually roll
an appropriate piloting skill for that vehicle for initiative.
The GM sets the DC of the piloting check using a
standard DC for the vehicle’s level, with adjustments based
on the circumstances. Generally speaking, an action that
would move a vehicle through difficult terrain increases
the DC to a hard DC for its level, and moving through
greater difficult terrain increases the DC to incredibly hard.
Other factors, such as turbulent winds for a wind-powered
vehicle, monsters threatening the creatures pulling a pulled
vehicle, or rough seas for a water-based vehicle could all
increase the DC of a vehicle’s piloting checks.

3
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

PILOTING ACTIONS
Characters use the actions listed below to move and
interact with vehicles. The effects of the reckless trait
appear on page 176.

4121929

BOARD [one-action]
MOVE

Requirements You are adjacent to a point of entry on the
vehicle you are attempting to board.
You board a vehicle through an open top, a door, a portal,
or a hatch; if you’re already on board, you can instead use
this action to disembark into an empty space adjacent to the
vehicle’s point of entry. Using this action while the vehicle is
in motion is challenging, requiring a successful Acrobatics or
Athletics check with a DC equal to the vehicle’s AC.

DRIVE (VARIES)
MOVE

Requirements You are piloting a vehicle.
You pilot your vehicle to move. Decide how many actions you
intend to spend before you begin Driving. The effects depend
on the number of actions you spend. You can’t Drive through
spaces occupied by creatures, even if they are allies.
[one-action] Attempt a piloting check. On a success, the vehicle moves up to
its Speed and can turn normally. On a failure, the vehicle moves
its Speed in a straight line. On a critical failure, the vehicle
moves its Speed in a straight line and becomes uncontrolled.
[two-actions] (reckless) The vehicle moves up to twice its Speed in a
straight line at the vehicle’s current heading.
[three-actions] (reckless) You take a –5 penalty on your piloting check
to maintain control of the vehicle. The vehicle moves up
to three times its Speed in a straight line at the vehicle’s
current heading.

175

18833983

4121930

4121930


Gamemastery Guide

18833984

18833984

4121930

RUN OVER [three-actions]
MOVE

RECKLESS

Requirements You are piloting a vehicle.
You try to run over creatures with your vehicle, possibly also
ramming one larger creature or object. If you maintain control of
your vehicle, the vehicle moves up to twice its Speed in a straight
line at the vehicle’s current heading. You attempt to run over
any creatures in your path two sizes smaller than the vehicle or
smaller, and you can attempt to ram one target creature or object
in your path one size smaller than the vehicle or larger.
Each creature in your path, including a rammed target, takes
the vehicle’s collision damage (basic Reflex save at vehicle’s
collision DC). If the rammed target is a vehicle, its pilot can
attempt a piloting check in place of this Reflex save, with the
same results. If the target of your ram takes damage, you and
your vehicle each take collision damage (no save) and your
movement ends.

STOP [one-action]

You grab the reins, the wheel, or some other mechanism to
control the vehicle. Attempt a piloting check; on a success, you
become the vehicle’s pilot, or regain control of the vehicle if it
was uncontrolled. Some vehicles have complicated controls that
cause this action to become a multi-action activity.

RECKLESS PILOTING
Actions that have the reckless trait push the pilot and the
vehicle beyond the normal parameters for safe operation,
and the pilot risks losing control of the vehicle. When
performing a reckless action, the pilot must first attempt
an appropriate piloting check to keep control of the
vehicle, with the following effects. Resolve this piloting
check before resolving the action itself.
Success The action occurs as described.
Failure The vehicle moves its Speed in a straight line along its
most recent heading, drifting up to 45 degrees at the GM’s
discretion, and becomes uncontrolled.

UNCONTROLLED VEHICLES

MANIPULATE

Requirements You are piloting a vehicle in motion.
You bring the vehicle to a stop.

TAKE CONTROL [one-action]
MANIPULATE

Requirements You are aboard the vehicle and adjacent to
its controls.

Some situations can cause a pilot to lose control of their
vehicle. Most commonly, this is due to a failed piloting
check for a reckless action, but it can also occur if a round
passes without a pilot using a move action to control the
vehicle or Stopping the vehicle. A vehicle can also become
uncontrolled if the pilot becomes unable to act during
a move action to control the vehicle. For example, if a

176

18833984

4121931

4121931

18833985

18833985


Subsystems

vehicle’s movement triggers an Attack of Opportunity
that knocks the pilot unconscious or paralyzes them, the
vehicle becomes uncontrolled.
An uncontrolled vehicle continues to move each round
at its most recent pilot’s initiative position. The distance it
moves each round is 10 feet less than on the previous round,
always in a straight line at its current heading until it crashes
or it comes to a stop. At your discretion, it could slow down
more if it’s on uneven terrain, difficult terrain, on an upward
slope, or facing adverse wind conditions; by the same token,
it could stay at the same speed or even accelerate if it’s on a
downward slope or being pushed by strong winds.
An uncontrolled vehicle in motion interacts with
obstacles, other vehicles, and creatures using the effects
of the Run Over action, except that the distance it moves
is dictated by the factors above instead of the Speed
specified in that action.

VEHICLES IN COMBAT
Whether driving a chariot in an arena or fighting off a
boarding party, characters sometimes attack from a vehicle
or target other creatures aboard a vehicle. Attacks made
while on a vehicle that has moved within the last round take
a –2 penalty, or a –4 penalty if the vehicle is uncontrolled
or any action in the last round had the reckless trait.
While on a vehicle, a character might have cover from
certain angles of attack. A vehicle with sides but no top,
such as a chariot or a keelboat, usually provides lesser
cover, or standard cover from an attacker on the ground.
An enclosed vehicle, such as a carriage, provides greater
cover or may prevent attacks entirely. Breaking the
vehicle can reduce the cover it provides.
Some vehicles have special mounted weapons that can
be used by the pilot or passengers. These are typically
ranged weapons, such as a crossbow, and use the same
rules as any other weapon, save that they might be able
to target only creatures in a certain range or direction.

BROKEN VEHICLES
When a vehicle is broken, it becomes harder to use. It
takes a –2 penalty to its AC, saves, and collision DC,
and the DC of all piloting checks related to the vehicle
increase by 5. The broken vehicle’s Speeds are halved.
A vehicle reduced to 0 HP is destroyed, like any other
item. If the vehicle is in water when it’s destroyed, it sinks;
if it is flying, it falls and everyone aboard takes falling
damage. A pulled or rowed vehicle that becomes wrecked,
regardless of which method of propulsion it’s using at the
time, deals its collision damage (no saving throw) to the
creatures pulling or rowing it, and the creatures may have
to be physically freed from the wreckage.

VEHICLE STATISTICS

Vehicles can be as simple as a farmer’s cart, or as large and
complex as an airship. Whatever the size or complexity of
a vehicle, it uses the following stat block format.

GALLOP
Horses and some other creatures have the Gallop action
(Bestiary 209). When all creatures pulling a vehicle have this
action, the pilot can take a –2 circumstance penalty to their
piloting check for a 2-action or 3-action Drive to gain the
circumstance bonus to Speed from the Gallop action.

3
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools

VEHICLE NAME
SIZE

VEHICLE [LEVEL]

OTHER TRAITS

Price This entry lists the vehicle’s Price. This does not include
creatures for pulling a vehicle, materials needed to power
the vehicle, or the cost of rowers.
Space This entry gives the vehicle’s dimensions, not including
any creatures pulling the vehicle.
Crew The crew members required to operate the vehicle;
Passengers the number of passengers the vehicle is
typically configured to carry, if any.
Piloting Check This entry lists the skills that can be used for
piloting checks while operating the vehicle. Some skills may
increase the DC; these list the DC adjustment in parentheses
following the skill name.
AC The vehicle’s AC; Saving Throws The vehicle’s saves
(typically only Fortitude). If a vehicle needs to attempt a
saving throw that isn’t listed, the pilot attempts a piloting
check at the same DC instead.
Hardness The vehicle’s hardness, HP The vehicle’s Hit Points,
with its Broken Threshold in parenthesis; Immunities The
vehicle’s immunities; Weaknesses The vehicle’s weaknesses,
if any; Resistances The vehicle’s resistances, if any.
Speed The vehicle’s Speeds, each followed by the propulsion
type for that Speed in parentheses. A pulled vehicle
indicates the number and size of the pulling creatures.
Collision The vehicle’s collision damage and the DC for saving
throws to mitigate that damage. Unless otherwise stated,
collisions deal bludgeoning damage. If the vehicle has any
other form of attack, like mounted weaponry, they appear
in their own entries below this one.
Special Abilities Any abilities unique to the vehicle are listed
at the end of the stat block.

Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121931

SAMPLE VEHICLES

Presented here is a sample of the many vehicles that can
be found throughout Golarion.

AIRSHIP

VEHICLE 12

RARE GARGANTUAN

Price 6,000 gp
Space 90 feet long, 30 feet wide, 60 feet high
Crew 1 pilot, 5 other crew; Passengers 15
Piloting Check Arcana (DC 32), Crafting (DC 32), Nature (DC
32), or Piloting Lore (DC 30)
AC 28; Fort +22
Hardness 20, HP 210 (BT 105); Immunities critical hits,
object immunities, precision damage; Weaknesses 15 fire
until broken

177

18833985

4121932

4121932


Gamemastery Guide

Speed the Speed of the pulling creature
(pulled by 1 Large creature)
Collision 1d10 (DC 14)

CHARIOT, HEAVY

Price 150 gp
Space 10 feet long, 10 feet wide, 4 feet high
Crew 1 pilot; Passengers 3
Piloting Check Driving Lore (DC 18) or Nature (DC
20 to DC 28, depending on pulling creature)
AC 14; Fort +9
Hardness 5, HP 40 (BT 20); Immunities critical hits, object
immunities, precision damage
Speed the Speed of the slowest pulling creature (pulled by 2
Large creatures)
Collision 2d10 (DC 18)

CHARIOT, LIGHT

VEHICLE 0

LARGE

18833986

18833986

VEHICLE 3

LARGE

Speed fly 50 feet (alchemical, magical)
Collision 9d10 (DC 30)
Sluggish This vehicle must move twice its length for each
90-degree turn it makes.

Price 10 gp
Space 5 feet long, 5 feet wide, 4 feet high
Crew 1 pilot
Piloting Check Driving Lore (DC 14) or Nature (DC 16 to DC
24, depending on pulling creature)
AC 10; Fort +6
Hardness 5, HP 14 (BT 7); Immunities critical hits, object
immunities, precision damage
Speed the Speed of the pulling creature (pulled by 1 Large
creature)
Collision 1d12 (DC 14)

CARRIAGE

GALLEY

VEHICLE 2

LARGE

VEHICLE 10

GARGANTUAN

Price 100 gp
Space 10 feet long, 10 feet wide, 7 feet high
Crew 1 pilot; Passengers 2
Piloting Check Driving Lore (DC 16) or Nature (DC 18 to DC 26,
depending on pulling creature)
AC 13; Fort +8
Hardness 5, HP 40 (BT 20); Immunities critical hits, object
immunities, precision damage
Speed the Speed of the slowest pulling creature (pulled by 2
Large creatures)
Collision 2d8 (DC 16)

CART

4121932

VEHICLE 0

LARGE

Price 3 gp
Space 10 feet long, 5 feet wide, 4 feet high
Crew 1 pilot; Passengers 1
Piloting Check Driving Lore (DC 14) or Nature (DC 16 to DC 24,
depending on pulling creature)
AC 10; Fort +6
Hardness 5, HP 14 (BT 7); Immunities critical hits, object
immunities, precision damage

Price 3,000 gp
Space 130 feet long, 20 feet wide, 25 feet high
Crew 1 pilot, 20 rowers; Passengers 6
Piloting Check Sailing Lore (DC 27), Diplomacy (DC 29), or
Intimidation (DC 29)
AC 25; Fort +19
Hardness 15, HP 170 (BT 85); Immunities critical hits, object
immunities, precision damage; Weaknesses 15 fire until broken
Speed swim 30 feet (rowed, wind)
Collision 7d10 (DC 27)
Maneuverable With a full complement of skilled rowers,
a rowed galley can turn swiftly, turn in place, and even
row backwards. Each 90-degree turn made in less than a
vehicle length costs 5 extra feet of movement. It can row
backwards no faster than half its speed, and it can’t turn
while rowing backwards.

GLIDER
UNCOMMON

VEHICLE 0
LARGE

Price 15 gp
Space 5 long, 10 feet wide, 2 feet high
Crew 1 pilot

178

18833986

4121933

4121933


Subsystems

Piloting Check Piloting Lore (DC 14) or Nature (DC 16)
AC 10; Fort +6
Hardness 0, HP 16 (BT 8); Immunities critical hits, object
immunities, precision damage; Weaknesses 5 fire
Speed fly 25 feet (wind)
Collision 2d4 (DC 14)
Starting Drop The only way to launch a glider is to jump off
a steep incline with favorable wind conditions. The glider
is uncontrolled and falls 60 feet each round until the pilot
successfully Takes Control. If the glider hits the ground
before the pilot successfully Takes Control, the pilot and
the glider each take falling damage.

ROWBOAT

VEHICLE 0

MEDIUM

Price 15 gp
Space 10 feet long, 5 feet wide, 3 feet high
Crew 1 pilot; Passengers 2
Piloting Check Athletics (DC 16) or Sailing Lore (DC 14)
AC 10; Fort +6
Hardness 5, HP 16 (BT 8); Immunities critical hits, object
immunities, precision damage
Speed swim 20 feet (rowed)
Collision 2d4 (DC 14)
Portaged The rowboat can be carried overland by 2 Medium
creatures or 1 Large creature. Those creatures are
encumbered when doing so.
18833987

18833987

SAILING SHIP

VEHICLE 9

GARGANTUAN

Price 2,000 gp
Space 75 feet long, 20 feet wide, 25 feet high
Crew 1 pilot, 8 crew; Passengers 10
Piloting Check Sailing Lore (DC 26), Diplomacy (DC 28), or
Intimidation (DC 28)
AC 23; Fort +18
Hardness 15, HP 150 (BT 75); Immunities critical hits, object
immunities, precision damage; Weaknesses 15 fire until broken
Speed swim 40 feet (wind)
Collision 6d10 (DC 26)
Sluggish This vehicle must move twice its length for each
90-degree turn it makes.

SLEIGH

Collision 2d6 (DC 15)
Ice Traverser Ice and snow are not difficult terrain to a sleigh,
but all other terrains are difficult terrain for it.
Sluggish This vehicle must move twice its length for each
90-degree turn it makes.

STEAM GIANT
RARE

VEHICLE 14

HUGE

Price 12,500 gp
Space 20 feet long, 20 feet wide, 25 feet high
Crew 1 pilot, 3 crew; Passengers 4
Piloting Check Driving Lore (DC 32) or Crafting (DC 34)
AC 33; Fort +28
Hardness 20, HP 200 (BT 100); Immunities critical hits, object
immunities, precision damage
Speed 20 feet (alchemical)
Collision 10d10 (DC 29)
Flame Jet [three-actions] (fire) Two crew members each perform a
3-action activity on their turn to produce a gout of flames
that erupts at the end of the second character’s turn from
any corner of any space the steam giant occupies. The flames
deal 6d8 fire damage to each creature in a 30-foot cone (DC
32 basic Reflex save). The flame jet stops working if the
steam giant is broken.

WAGON

3
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

VEHICLE 1

LARGE

Price 25 gp
Space 10 feet long, 10 feet wide, 7 feet high
Crew 1 pilot; Passengers 2
Piloting Check Driving Lore (DC 15) or Nature (DC 17 to DC 25,
depending on the pulling creature)
AC 11; Fort +7
Hardness 5, HP 18 (BT 9); Immunities critical hits, object
immunities, precision damage
Speed the Speed of the slowest pulling creature (pulled by 2
Large creatures)
Collision 2d6 (DC 15)

4121933

VEHICLE 1

LARGE

Price 50 gp
Space 10 feet long, 5 feet wide, 4 feet high
Crew 1 pilot; Passengers 1
Piloting Check Driving Lore (DC 15) or Nature (DC 17 to DC 25,
depending on pulling creature)
AC 11; Fort +7
Hardness 5, HP 18 (BT 9); Immunities critical hits,
object immunities, precision damage
Speed the Speed of the slowest pulling
creature (pulled by 2 Large creatures or
6 Medium creatures)

179

18833987

4121934

4121934


Gamemastery Guide

18833988

18833988

4121934

180

18833988

4121935

4121935

18833989

18833989


Variant Rules

CHAPTER 4: VARIANT RULES

While the rules presented in the Core Rulebook are designed to give you and your group a
baseline experience that’s easy to learn and fun to play, sometimes you’re looking for more
customizable options. That’s where variant rules come in: options to alter the game’s rules
to fit your needs. This chapter adds a collection of variant rules to your toolbox, often
with additional options for how to use them.
Most of the variant rules in this chapter involve characters, how they progress, and
how those pieces fit together. The variants included in this chapter are divided into
the following sections.
• Ability Score Variants (page 182) includes an alternate ability score system
that works entirely through Ability Points, plus ways to distribute what each
ability score impacts more evenly.
• Alignment Variants (page 184) contains options for removing alignment and
an incremental alignment system.
• Deep Backgrounds (page 186) replace simply selecting a background with a
series of steps that flesh out more of the character’s backstory.
• Feats and Features (page 192) shows how to build characters who gain feats
and class features in different ways, from dual-classed characters with all the
options of two classes to characters with a free archetype or more ancestry feats.
• Level 0 Characters (page 195) can play through the characters’ adventures
before they take on character classes.
• Magic Item Variants (page 196) contains rules deconstructing the magic item
bonuses, allowing you to progress them automatically or via craftsmanship to
more easily run a lower-magic game.
• Proficiency without Level (page 198) changes the fundamental math of the
proficiency system to tell stories where being outnumbered by weaker foes
remains a challenge and high-level characters are less superhuman.
• Skill Points (page 199) offers a more granular system for characters to choose
and hone their skills.
• Stamina (page 200) grants characters a pool of Stamina Points that they lose
before Hit Points and can recover with by resting to catch their breath.

COMBINING VARIANTS
If your group is playing a game
with themes that call for it, you
might wind up combining multiple
variant rules together, possibly
applying several options at the
same time. For instance, in a gritty,
low-magic, survival-horror game,
you might start the PCs as 0-level
characters, remove alignment to
allow more shades of gray, alter
the proficiency bonus progression
to remove level, and remove
magic items—all at the same time.
In general, the variant options
in this chapter are sufficiently
self‑contained, with explanations
of how they change the game, that
you should be able to combine
them without trouble. When you
design your own variant rules, be
on the lookout for places where
new rules might have unexpected
overlapping effects on each other
and the game.

4
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121935

CHOOSING VARIANT RULES

When you and your group are deciding which variant rules to use, think about the
types of stories you want to tell together, including the genre, themes, and characters,
and use that information to choose which variant rules might be the best fit. If
different players think different variant options would work best for the game, let
each of them make their point, but ultimately you as the GM make the final call.
You might discover that your game requires variant rules beyond those listed
here—and that’s okay! In fact, it’s to be expected. Use these options as a starting
point for some of the most commonly helpful tools, but you and your group should
work together to build your own variant rules whenever you want a different
experience. Don’t be afraid to deviate from the baseline—you and your group
know what you like and what you’re looking for better than a baseline rules set
ever could. More about creating your own house rules can be found on page 29.
If you’re not sure about a variant rule, take a chance! Make sure everyone in
your group understands that this is a trial run and that you might need to adjust
or remove the variant rules later on if they’re causing unexpected side effects or
not working as you intended. When you’re playing with variant rules, be sure to
let any new players who join the group know about the variant rules your group
has chosen. This helps them set their expectations and ensures they don’t feel
ambushed by any variant rules the first time they’re encountered in the game, which
is important for making sure there is a feeling of fairness among your players.

181

18833989

4121936

4121936


Gamemastery Guide

ABILITY SCORE VARIANTS

The default method of generating ability scores in the Core Rulebook can help you learn
your character’s story along the way, while the alternative method, rolling scores, is a nod to
tradition. But other ways to generate ability scores might better suit the story you want to tell.

GRADUAL ABILITY BOOSTS

In this variant, a character gains ability boosts more
gradually as they level up, rather than receiving four ability
boosts at 5th, 10th, 15th, and 20th levels. Each character
gains one ability boost when they reach each of 2nd, 3rd,
4th, and 5th levels. These are collectively a single set of
ability boosts, so a character can’t boost the same ability
score more than once per set; players can put a dot next
to each boosted ability score or otherwise mark it to keep
track. PCs also receive an ability boost at 7th, 8th, 9th, and
10th level (a second set); at 12th, 13th, 14th, and 15th level
(a third set); and at 17th, 18th, 19th, and 20th level (the
fourth and final set).
This spreads out the ability boosts, and using them
earlier means a character can increase their most
important ability modifiers at a lower level. This makes
characters slightly more powerful on average, but it makes
levels 5, 10, 15, and 20 less important since characters
usually choose the least important ability boost of the set
at those levels.
18833990

18833990

POINT BUY

This alternative ability score generation method replaces
ability boosts and flaws with a number of Ability Points.
Players determine their ability scores by investing Ability
Points into each score, as seen in Table 4–1: Cost for an
Ability Score. These give players more customization
in their ability scores and can allow a player to really
prioritize their favorite ones, but the system is significantly
more complicated to use.

STEP 1: DECREASE STARTING SCORES
All of a character’s ability scores start at 10. If the PC’s
ancestry has ability flaws, decrease those ability scores to
8. A player can also voluntarily lower any ability score
to below 10 to gain more Ability Points to use in Step 2.
They gain 1 Ability Point for lowering an ability score to
9, or 2 Ability Points for lowering a score to 8.

STEP 2: SPEND POINTS
Now that each player has set their minimum scores,
they’ll spend Ability Points to increase their ability scores.
Ability Points come in two categories: dedicated and
flexible. Dedicated Ability Points can be spent only on
specified ability scores, but flexible Ability Points can be
used to increase any scores. These Ability Points replace
all the ability boosts a character would normally get.
The total number of Ability Points spent determines the
character’s starting ability score, as shown on Table 4–1:

Cost for an Ability Score. The maximum score a player
can buy at character creation is 18. Raising a score costs 2
points more than the listed value if the score started at an 8
after Step 1, or 1 point more if the score started at a 9. Any
Ability Points not spent during character creation are lost.
• Dedicated Ability Points: A character gets 2 dedicated
Ability Points for each ability score their ancestry
gives predetermined ability boosts to. Human
characters, or those with another ancestry that grants
two free ability boosts, get 2 more flexible Ability
Points instead. Each character also gets 2 dedicated
Ability Points for one of their background’s choices of
predetermined ability scores, and 2 dedicated Ability
Points for their class’s key ability score.
• Flexible Ability Points: Each character gets 15
flexible Ability Points, plus any gained for voluntarily
lowering ability scores below 10 in Step 1.

TABLE 4–1: COST FOR AN ABILITY SCORE
Total Ability Points Spent
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
5
7
10
13
17

Ability Score
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

4121936

INCREASING SCORES AT HIGHER LEVELS
When a character levels up, they gain Ability Points at each
level, as shown on Table 4–2: Ability Points Gained. Unlike
the Ability Points from character creation, a player can
save these to buy a more expensive increase, and they can
increase ability scores to a maximum of 22. When a player
is ready to increase one or more ability scores, they spend
the number of Ability Points listed on Table 4–3: Raising
an Ability Score and increase the ability score accordingly.
A player can increase a score more than once at a given
time, but they must pay for each increase individually, such
as going from 14 to 16 by spending 2 points to increase
from 14 to 15, and then 3 points to increase from 15 to 16.
For most games, it’s best to increase scores when leveling
up, between game sessions, or during downtime.
Apex items work as described in the Core Rulebook.
They can increase an ability score to a maximum of 24.

182

18833990

4121937

4121937

18833991

18833991


Variant Rules

TABLE 4–2: ABILITY POINTS GAINED
Level
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Ability Points Gained
Starting points
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5

TABLE 4–3: RAISING AN ABILITY SCORE
Current Ability Score
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

Cost to Raise by 1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
5
6
7
8

EXAMPLE
Merisiel is an elven rogue with the criminal background.
She starts with 10 in all ability scores and reduces her
Constitution to 8 for being an elf. She decides to voluntarily
lower her Strength and Intelligence to 8 each, gaining 4
flexible Ability Points. She has now set her minimum
scores: Str 8, Dex 10, Con 8, Int 8, Wis 10, and Cha 10.
In Step 2, she starts by determining how many points
she has to spend. She gains 2 dedicated Ability Points in
Intelligence and Dexterity for being an elf, 2 in Dexterity
for being a criminal, and 2 more in Dexterity for being a
rogue. She also has 19 flexible points to spend: 15 plus 4
for the two ability scores she voluntarily lowered to 8.
Merisiel purchases an 18 in Dexterity, which costs her the
6 dedicated Ability Points plus 11 flexible Ability Points.
Spending her 2 dedicated Ability Points in Intelligence

brings her to a 10, which she’s happy with. She now has
8 flexible Ability Points left. She’s worried she’ll be too
frail with a Constitution score of only 8, so she spends
4 flexible Ability Points to increase it to 12, leaving her
with 4 Ability Points left over. Finally, she raises Wisdom
and Charisma each to 12 because it’s inexpensive but still
grants her bonuses; this uses all her Ability Points, leaving
her with Str 8, Dex 18, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 12, Cha 12.
When she reaches 2nd level, she gains 2 Ability Points.
She decides to save these until 3rd level, when she gains 2
more. She then spends 3 of her 4 Ability Points to raise her
Constitution from 12 to 14. She then saves up for more
Dexterity, gaining 2 Ability Points each at 4th and 5th
levels, then 3 each at 6th and 7th levels. She spends all 11
Ability Points at 7th level to gain a 20 in Dexterity! Unless
it helps her to have an odd score (for example, to satisfy
a feat prerequisite), it’s usually best to wait until she has
enough Ability Points that increasing a score will increase
her modifier—just in case she changes her mind.

4
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

ALTERNATIVE SCORES

The classic ability scores aren’t of equal value in the rules.
Dexterity, Constitution, and Wisdom tend to be more
important unless a character requires a particular ability
score from among the other three for a specific purpose. If
you’d prefer ability scores to all be of roughly equivalent
value in character building, this variant creates six ability
scores that are in much closer balance with each other.
Make the following changes.
• Strength does everything that both Strength
and Constitution do in the Core Rulebook, and
Constitution is gone. A character uses their Strength
for melee weapon and unarmed attack rolls, damage
rolls, Athletics, Hit Points, Fortitude saves, and so on.
• Dexterity splits into two ability scores. The first, still
called Dexterity, represents manual dexterity and
applies to ranged weapon and unarmed attack rolls,
attack and damage rolls with finesse attacks (if better
than Strength), and Thievery checks. Agility, which
represents footwork, applies to Armor Class, Reflex
saves, Acrobatics checks, and Stealth checks.
• Charisma applies to Will saves instead of Wisdom.
• Wisdom is otherwise unchanged.
• Intelligence is unchanged.
You’ll need a small number of gameplay tweaks. Anklets
of alacrity become an Agility apex item, both the belt of
giant strength and belt of regeneration become Strength
apex items, and so on. The rogue’s thief racket is obsolete,
so you might allow rogues to choose a different racket but
still gain Thievery. For anything else that references an
ability score, such as feats with a Dexterity prerequisite,
decide with you group whether Dexterity or Agility
makes more sense as the prerequisite. For instance, Agility
would make sense for Feather Step since that feat involves
footwork. Prewritten NPCs and monsters can just use their
Dexterity modifier when their Agility modifier is necessary.

4121937

183

18833991

4121938

4121938


Gamemastery Guide

ALIGNMENT VARIANTS

The alignment system has a long history in roleplaying games, and it helps define several
aspects of Pathfinder’s worlds and characters. Yet it doesn’t work well for all games or
groups. Altering or removing it offers new opportunities for your game.
Pathfinder’s alignment system summarizes a character’s
ideals, signals that some of the players’ opponents are
despicable villains, and establishes that truly evil monsters
exist. The alignment system can trouble some players
because it doesn’t simulate the nuance and complexity
of real‑world moral issues, which are often not so easily
categorized. What is considered “good” may be heavily
influenced by societal norms or religious beliefs. It’s not hard
to find two kind, generous people who hold starkly differing
interpretations of what good is in specific situations. The
variant alignment ideas below provide examples of other
options and can serve as inspiration for your own games.

MINOR CHANGES

If you want to keep parts of the existing alignment system,
you can use either of the following variants to make
changes without entirely removing or replacing alignment.
Alignment-based effects still exist in both of these variants,
but they might not be as useful as in standard Pathfinder.

MAJOR CHANGES

EXTREME GOOD AND EVIL

18833992

18833992

character living on the edge between alignments to see that
represented in the rules. This is not meant to be a highly
granular system or one a player can exploit by repeatedly
making trivial gestures toward a given alignment. It’s
meant to indicate the trends of a character’s behavior and
foreshadow any alignment change that might occur over
time. It’s typically harder to reach the ends of the scale
through minor acts, especially for the evil versus good axis.
A character who commits multiple minor acts toward an
alignment might shift one step, but it would take a truly
reprehensible act to shift them fully to evil all at once—
and to recover it could take a long-term atonement and
commitment to good.
If a rule depends on a character’s alignment, disregard
the “fully” and “somewhat” distinctions. A protection spell
keyed against evil works against both somewhat and fully
evil characters. However, some spells, like detect alignment,
might give more precise information.

These two variants massively change how the alignment
system works. In fact, one removes it entirely!

In this variant, some creatures exemplify the concepts of
extreme good and evil by their very nature. Only fiends,
celestials, and other residents of aligned Outer Sphere planes
have an alignment. Remove most alignment restrictions—
such as the cleric and champion restrictions—but not ones
related to those extraplanar creatures. Replace the removed
restrictions with appropriate anathema if necessary.

NO ALIGNMENT
The simplest variant is to not use the alignment system
at all. To many players, this feels like the variant closest
to real-world morality. Creatures, NPCs, and players have
complex and many-layered beliefs and motivations, just
like humans in the real world. Not using the alignment
system simultaneously embraces complexity and variance
in what is seen as moral behavior. For example, worshippers
of a powerful sun god might feel that spreading their
deity’s light is virtuous behavior. Some might go so far as
to say this means they should conquer their neighbors in
order to achieve this. Another example might be a large
and powerful government placing safety and security
as its foremost concern, drawing the conclusion that it’s
acceptable to sacrifice some individual liberties in favor of
increasing the safety of its citizens.

INCREMENTAL ALIGNMENT
Changing character alignment can be extremely dramatic
under the Core Rulebook rules. Sometimes, this comes as
a surprise to the player, as they find out they and the GM
had differing ideas on how their acts impact alignment.
The incremental alignment variant breaks each axis of
alignment into seven steps that reflect how close a character
is to shifting alignments.
This lets you and the player better understand where the
character falls, and it allows a player who wants to play a

TABLE 4–4: CHANGING ALIGNMENT
1
2

4121938

3

4

5

6

7

FULLY
LAWFUL

SOMEWHAT
LAWFUL

SOMEWHAT
NEUTRAL

FULLY
NEUTRAL

SOMEWHAT
NEUTRAL

SOMEWHAT
CHAOTIC

FULLY
CHAOTIC

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

FULLY GOOD

SOMEWHAT
GOOD

SOMEWHAT
NEUTRAL

FULLY
NEUTRAL

SOMEWHAT
NEUTRAL

SOMEWHAT
EVIL

FULLY EVIL

184

18833992

4121939

4121939

18833993

18833993


Variant Rules

MORAL INTENTIONS
In this variant, every character, NPC, and monster selects one or more closely held
beliefs, intentions, or loyalties. Simple statements about a character’s intentions, like
the examples listed in the sidebar, flesh out characters and enliven roleplaying scenes.
This system requires some back-and-forth between the GM and the other players,
and more thought on the part of everyone at the table.
Typically, specifying three intentions or loyalties works well to define a character.
These personal intentions cover broad spectra of behavior and in large part define
the subjective definition of good for that individual. Intentions could be as abstract
as acting with honor or as concrete as devotion to the character’s mother. A person
following their core beliefs or intentions feels like they are acting in a good manner,
and they are likely to view actions against or restrictions to these beliefs as evil. For
example, a character who believes strongly in the law would see allowing a crime to
go unpunished as evil.
A specific individual will likely have different levels of commitment for each of
their intentions. Determine a relative order of commitment by considering what the
character would do if these intentions came into conflict.

EXAMPLE MORAL
INTENTIONS
• I will never let my companions
down.
• I will avenge my family.
• I will protect the natural world.
• I will achieve great wealth.
• I will spread the word of my deity.
• I will help others in need.
• I will spread the rule of the
rightful government.

RULES ADJUSTMENTS

4
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

Alignment restrictions no longer exist in either major variant. You can
replace them with edicts and anathema, if necessary, and make the
following other adjustments.

Aligned Damage
If you’re using the no alignment variant, remove or
replace aligned damage (chaotic, evil, good, and
lawful damage), which requires significant
adjustments for creatures like angels and
devils that were built with a weakness to
aligned damage. One option is to replace
them one-for-one with new damage types
like “radiant” and “shadow” that don’t have
any moral assumptions. Another option is to simply change the damage
type needed for creature weaknesses to some other damage type on
a case-by-case basis. A third option is to remove the weaknesses,
reduce the monsters’ maximum Hit Points, and call it good. No
matter what you do with creatures, you’ll also have to replace
abilities like the champion’s that deal aligned damage in a
similar way, or remove those abilities.
If you’re using the moral intentions variant, you
can replace chaotic, evil, good, and lawful
damage with a single type of damage called
aligned damage, which harms those with intentions directly
opposed to those held by the character, as determined by you
as GM.

4121939

Detection
Alignment-detecting effects don’t exist. In the moral intentions
variant, you might replace such an ability with one that detects
whether a creature is following its own intentions, or to
detect others with similar intentions to the creature using
the ability.

Traits
Alignment traits don’t exist, and anything that has those traits loses them. Effects
that require the traits to function, like protection, don’t exist.

185

18833993

4121940

4121940


Gamemastery Guide

DEEP BACKGROUNDS

The decision of a character background is not necessarily a complicated one; the player
simply selects from the available background options to reflect their character’s life before
adventuring. While this is a good method for determining a character’s backstory, some
players might want more insight into their character’s early life or family.

USING DEEP
BACKGROUNDS

This variant replaces Step 4 of Character Creation (Core
Rulebook page 25). The player rolls on the tables in this
section to determine their character’s family background,
homeland, major childhood event, influential associate,

REROLLING AND SELECTING
At your discretion, the players don’t have to be bound by
any results from the following tables. Depending on how
your group wants to use deep backgrounds, players can
reroll any result they don’t like, or even select a specific
option from a table that fits their emerging vision of their
character. However, if you allow players to reroll or directly
select options (and potentially even if you don’t), you might
want to exclude options that grant feats other than skill
feats; these options are unusual enough that they might put
too much pressure on players to select only these options.
Note that the following tables reflect the Core Rulebook
and the Age of Lost Omens setting—if your game takes
place in a different setting, feel free to adjust the tables or
allow players to select the options that best fit your setting.

18833994

18833994

relationships, and drawbacks. Each element of the player’s
background adds options to the final list of ability boosts,
skills, feats, and other options that their background can
grant. The player writes these options down as they build
their character’s background. At the end of the process, they
select the following from among the options written down.
• Two ability boosts, each to a different ability score.
• Training in a Lore skill.
• One skill feat (or possibly another feat or piece of
equipment). If the player chooses a skill feat, they
become trained in its prerequisite skill, or one of its
possible prerequisite skills if it has multiple (such as
Quick Identification). If the random results include a
feat that isn’t a skill feat and the player selects that
feat, they don’t gain training in a skill. If they choose
a piece of equipment instead of a skill feat, the entry
indicates what skill training, if any, they receive.

4121940

GENERATING DEEP
BACKGROUNDS

As a player, follow the steps below to generate your
character’s deep background.

STEP 1: FAMILY BACKGROUND
The word family means something different to everyone.
You might have a biological family, adopted family, stepfamily, or any other kind and combination you choose;
family bonds come in all types. To determine the number of
family members you grew up with as an active part of your
life, roll 1d% on the following table. Use the medium family
for most ancestries, small if you’re a half-elf or half-orc, and
large if you’re a goblin or halfling. For ancestries other than

186

18833994

4121941

4121941

18833995

18833995


Variant Rules

those in the Core Rulebook, use the column that best suits
the ancestry. It’s up to you whether these family members
are parents, siblings, grandparents, or other close relatives.

2–3

TABLE 4–5: FAMILY SIZE
d%
1–4
5–8
9–20
21–34
35–39
40–50
51–60
61–65
66–69
70–78
79–80
81–87
88–90
91–93
94–95
96–97
98–99
100

Small Family
0
0
0
0
1
1
2
2
2
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
7
8+

Medium Family
0
0
0
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
4
5
5
6
6
7
7
8+

Large Family
0
1
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
5
6
6
6
7
7
7
8+
8+

• If you grew up with no family, you had to learn to
survive on your own. Add a Strength ability boost and
a Constitution ability boost to your options.
• If you grew up with one or two family members, your
closeness to them made you highly aware of their
feelings, and you. Add an Intelligence ability boost and
a Wisdom ability boost to your options.
• If you grew up with three or more family members,
you had to mediate family conflicts and negotiate a
crowded home. Add a Charisma ability boost and a
Dexterity ability boost to your options.

4–5

6–7

8–9

10–11

12

13–14

STEP 2: HOMELAND
Where you grew up is highly formative. Roll on the
following table to determine the nature of your homeland.
If your character is a dwarf, subtract 3; if an elf, add 2; if
a goblin, subtract 4. For ancestries other than those in the
Core Rulebook, apply a modifier that best suits the ancestry,
if needed. Work with your GM to flesh your homeland out
in further detail. With any of these options, you add a Lore
skill based on your homeland’s terrain to your background
options, such as Forest Lore for a wooded frontier or
Absalom Lore if you grew up in that city.

15

TABLE 4–6: HOMELAND
1d20
Result
1 or less Underground You grew up in a partly or wholly
underground region, such as a human mining
town, a goblin warren, or a dwarf-held cavern. Add
Engineering Lore, Labor Lore, and Mining Lore to
your background options.

16

Frontier You grew up at the edge of a settled region.
This might have been isolated hills if you are a dwarf,
a ranch or farm if you are a human, or another similar
frontier. Add Farming Lore, Fishing Lore, Hunting
Lore, Scouting Lore, and Lore pertaining to a type of
creature that threatened your homeland regularly
(such as Giant Lore) to your background options.
Trade Town People frequently passed through your
homeland. You might have been raised near a major
thoroughfare or crossroads, or in a small trade town.
Add Accounting Lore, Guild Lore, Mercantile Lore,
Stabling Lore, and Lore of a common ancestry (such
as Dwarf Lore) to your background options.
Simple Village You were raised in a sleepy village
such as a bucolic gnome hamlet, a close-knit human
town, or an established goblin fort. Add Herbalism
Lore, Midwifery Lore, Milling Lore, Tanning Lore, and
Lore of a type of food, drink, or product the village
was known for producing (such as Alcohol Lore or
Wagon Lore) to your background options.
Cosmopolitan City You were raised in a community
where no single ancestry predominated. This might
have created tensions, but the community might also
have pulled together from diverse foundations. Add
Art Lore, Guild Lore, Legal Lore, and Underworld Lore
to your background options.
Metropolis You grew up in one of the largest cities
in the world, such as Absalom or Westcrown. Add
Architecture Lore, Gladiatorial Lore, Guild Lore, Legal
Lore, and Theater Lore to your background options.
Front Lines You grew up in a homeland torn by war.
Even if you didn’t personally participate, it was never
far away. Add Heraldry Lore, Scouting Lore, and
Warfare Lore to your background options.
Itinerant You never had a single place to call home.
You might have been part of a nomadic caravan,
a traveling group of entertainers, or a smuggling
ring. Add Circus Lore, Fortune-Telling Lore, Games
Lore, Labor Lore, and Underworld Lore to your
background options.
Another Ancestry’s Settlement Randomly determine
another common ancestry; you grew up surrounded
by that ancestry. Reroll on this table (with a modifier
for the new ancestry, if applicable) to determine
the type of community in which you grew up (for
example, if your gnome grew up among dwarves
and rolls a 3, they grew up underground). Add the
Adopted Ancestry feat and the Lore skill related to
your adopted ancestry (such as Dwarf Lore) to your
background options. If you select this feat instead of
a skill feat, you aren’t trained in a background skill.
Coastal Community You grew up along a wide
river, in a wetland, beside an ocean, or on an
island. Add Fishing Lore, Sailing Lore, and Lore of
a specific type of sea creature (such as Shark Lore)
to your background options.

4
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121941

187

18833995

4121942

4121942


Gamemastery Guide

17–18

19+

9

10

11

STEP 3: MAJOR CHILDHOOD EVENT
During your childhood, you were influenced by a significant
event that helped shape the person you became. Roll on the
table below to determine the type of event that shaped you.

12

TABLE 4–7: MAJOR CHILDHOOD EVENT

13

1d20 Result
1
Abandoned in a Distant Land Due to some
mischance (such as wandering off while on a trip
or being press-ganged onto a seagoing ship), you
had to survive in a distant land for a while. Add the
Multilingual skill feat to your background options.
2
Academy Trained You attended an academy where
you studied a number of topics and skills. Whether you
were a studious pupil or a dropout, the academy was
your home for a good portion of your formative years.
Add the Additional Lore skill feat to your background
options. If you select Additional Lore as your skill
feat, instead of becoming trained in Lore, you become
trained in your choice of Arcana, Occultism, or Society.
3
Attained a Magical Gift When you were a child, you
found, stole, or were given a magic item that gave
you an extraordinary ability. Add the Arcane Sense
skill feat to your background options.
4
Betrayed A friend or family member whom you
trusted more than anyone else betrayed you. Add
the Lie to Me skill feat to your background options.
5
Bullied In your early life, you were often picked on. The
callousness of bullies sharpened your resolve to stand
up for yourself and others. Add the Intimidating Glare
skill feat to your background options.
6
Captured by Giants You were captured by marauding
giants and fought your way free. Add the Titan
Wrestler skill feat to your background options.
7
Claimed an Inheritance You were bequeathed great
wealth or property at an early age. You retained some
of it; add a piece of common adventuring gear worth
15 gp or less to your background options. If you select
it instead of a skill feat, you are trained in Society.
8
Died You died or came so close that you walked the
boundary between life and death. Add the Diehard feat
to your background options. If you select it instead of a
skill feat, you aren’t trained in a background skill.

18833996

18833996

Religious Community You were raised in a
community of religious scholars, such as the town
around an abbey, a remote elven forest shrine, or a
dwarven temple-city. Add Art Lore, Scribing Lore,
Lore about a deity that was the focus or enemy of
your community (such as Pharasma Lore), and Lore
about a plane (other than the Material Plane) where
that deity resides to your background options.
Academic Community You were raised in or near
a university, academy, or other center of learning.
Add Academia Lore, Genealogy Lore, Library Lore,
and Scribing Lore to your background options.

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

Fell In with a Bad Crowd In your youth, you ran with
a criminal element: a gang, thieves’ guild, or similar
organization. Add the Experienced Smuggler skill feat
to your background options.
Had an Ordinary Childhood Your childhood was fairly
ordinary, with no major catastrophe—a stark contrast
to most adventurers. Add the Assurance skill feat for
a skill of your choice to your background options.
Had Your First Kill You’ve had blood on your hands
since your youth, when you first took the life of
another. You still have the weapon you used for the
deed; add a common weapon worth 15 gp or less to
your background options. If you select this option
instead of a skill feat, you are trained in Athletics.
Kidnapped You were kidnapped at some point
in your childhood and had to escape, perhaps by
pirates, slavers, a cult, or someone else. Add the
Quick Squeeze skill feat to your background options.
Lost in the Wilderness Whether lured to the
wilderness by a malevolent force or simply lost, you
had to survive on your own for a while. Add the
Survey Wildlife skill feat to your background options.
Met a Fantastic Creature When you were a child, you
made contact with a magical creature, such as a dragon,
unicorn, genie, pixie, or similar creature. Add the
Recognize Spell skill feat to your background options.
Raided A horde of raiders attacked your settlement
and killed and wounded several of your people. This
could have been a band of highway robbers or a
conquering army. You have a relic from those times;
add an armor or shield worth 15 gp or less to your
background options. If you select this option instead
of a skill feat, you are trained in Medicine.
Robbed Your family’s possessions were stolen, and you
vowed to catch the next burglar in the act. Add the
Snare Crafting skill feat to your background options.
Survived a Disaster You witnessed and survived a
major disaster in your childhood years—such as a
great fire, flood, earthquake, volcano, or storm—by
relying on what was at hand. Add the Quick Repair
skill feat to your background options.
Trained by a Mentor A mentor or patron took an
interest in your development and volunteered
to train or sponsor you. Add the Experienced
Professional skill feat to your background options.
Witnessed War You grew up against the backdrop
of a major military conflict that affected much of
your childhood world. Add the Battle Medicine skill
feat to your background options.
Won a Competition You distinguished yourself at an
early age when you won a competition. This might
have been a martial contest of arms, a showing
of apprentice magicians, high-stakes gambling, or
something more mundane, like an eating contest.
Add the Fascinating Performance skill feat to your
background options.

4121942

188

18833996

4121943

4121943


Variant Rules

4
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18833997

18833997

4121943

STEP 4: INFLUENTIAL ASSOCIATE
You may have had several people who played key roles
in developing their skills and personality, but one likely
stands out as the most influential. Use one of the results
below as a template to develop an NPC in deeper detail.
Work with your GM to determine the current fate of this
NPC and whether you can still call upon the NPC for aid.

4

TABLE 4–8: INFLUENTIAL ASSOCIATE
1d20 Result
1
The Academic One of your associates had a thirst for
knowledge that could never be satisfied with simple
answers. Through this association, you developed
a keen appreciation for numbers, geometry, logic,
hard study, and problem-solving. Add an Intelligence
ability boost to your background options.
2
The Boss You once gained employment under a
powerful individual with far-reaching influence.
When the boss spoke up, everyone listened. This
could have been a military commander, village
leader, guild head, or gang boss. From the boss,
you learned how to make people listen and keep
them in line. Add a Charisma ability boost to your
background options.
3
The Champion You were close to someone who
excelled at athletic endeavors and tests of strength
or skill. Through your friendship or rivalry, you

5

6

7

developed a competitive spirit that continues to drive
you in everything you do. Add a Strength ability
boost to your background options.
The Confidante You could tell this person anything.
They know your deepest secrets and vulnerabilities
just as you know theirs, and thinking critically
about another’s perspective became second nature
to you. Add an Intelligence ability boost to your
background options.
The Crafter One of your major influences cherished
perfection through art. From this person, you
developed a disciplined mind, a solitary focus,
and the ability to create something useful and
beautiful. Add an Intelligence ability boost to your
background options.
The Criminal One of your associates committed
crimes regularly. They regaled you with many stories
of daring robberies and break-ins—perhaps even
murders. You learned what you know of the criminal
element from this friend. Add a Dexterity ability
boost to your background options.
The Dead One One of your greatest influences was
a sapient undead creature, such as a ghost, lich,
graveknight, or vampire. Through this strange
relationship, you learned of its mortal life, giving
you perspective on your own life. Add a Constitution
ability boost to your background options.

189

18833997

4121944

4121944


Gamemastery Guide

8

9

10

11

12

18833998

18833998

13

14

15

16

The Fiend You dealt with, or were possessed by, a
fiend who lent you power at a time of great need.
Some part of it remains inside you, influencing you
toward destructive ends. Add a Strength ability boost
to your background options.
The Fool One of your close associates mocked propriety
and custom, engaging in wild and somewhat random
actions from time to time. After a while, you learned
there was simple wisdom to this foolery—a careless
worldview that taught you to cast off concern. Add a
Wisdom ability boost to your background options.
The Hunter This person was a lone wolf who cautiously
allowed you to become a member of their solitary pack.
They taught you how to remain quick and thrive on
your own in spite of natural dangers. Add a Dexterity
ability boost to your background options.
The Liege Lord You became close with someone you
were bound to serve, be it an employer, minor lord
or lady, or even a king or queen. Though this person
held power over you, they held you closer than a
subject or servant. As a result, you’re used to dealing
with and being close to power. Add a Charisma
ability boost to your background options.
The Lover You had a romantic connection in your
past, and this person deeply influenced your
personality. Perhaps this was a first love, a casual
partner you grew close to, or the one who got away.
The experience bolstered your confidence in romantic
interactions, even though your thoughts still stray
toward that special someone from long ago. Add a
Charisma ability boost to your background options.
The Mentor You had a mentor who taught you
everything worth knowing about life. This could have
been the person who taught you your heroic abilities,
or simply a kindred spirit who helped form your
worldview. Add a Constitution ability boost to your
background options.
The Mercenary With this person, there was always a
cost. No deed came without a trade for something of
equal or greater value. You respected their cynical but
fair dealings, and they influenced your philosophy. Add
a Strength ability boost to your background options.
The Mystic You were especially close to a holy
person in your community who fundamentally
changed your life, opening your eyes to the
incredible powers that exist beyond the natural
world. Regardless of whether you now follow a faith,
certain religious artifacts, rituals, and texts played a
large part in making you the person you are. Add a
Wisdom ability boost to your background options.
The Pariah You met a disgraced exile and found in
their words something that spoke to you. What once
seemed true in your religion, society, or family began
to appear false, and you quickly learned not to trust
everyone you meet. Add a Wisdom ability boost to
your background options.

17

18

19

20

The Relative You were especially close to a specific
relative growing up. To you, this person was the
meaning of family. They helped shepherd you into
adulthood, teaching you everything you know
about the world. You resolutely strive to keep a
promise, vow, or oath that you made to them. Add a
Constitution ability boost to your background options.
The Seer You were close to a person who claimed to
see the future—perhaps an oracle, seer, prophet, or
merely some festival charlatan. The seer’s influence
either made you into an optimist with a drive to fulfill
that future or a fatalist resigned to accept it. Add a
Wisdom ability boost to your background options.
The Wanderer You knew someone who traveled from
place to place with the changing of the wind, such as
a minstrel, merchant, outcast, mercenary, or sailor.
This person brought you wondrous mementos and
inspired a wanderlust within you. Add a Dexterity
ability boost to your background options.
The Well-Connected Friend In your circle of
associates, there was someone everyone knew. This
person had contacts in every social circle. Through
this connection, you continue to meet and associate
with a wide variety of people in every walk of life. Add
a Charisma ability boost to your background options.

STEP 5: RELATIONSHIPS
This aspect of background generation determines the
relationships you have with the other PCs and why your
character might choose to adventure with them. This step is
best performed when the entire group is sitting together and
can generate and discuss these connections with each other.
You should select another character and roll on the first
table to generate an inspiring connection, then determine a
different character and roll on the second table to generate a
challenging connection. You might choose these characters
randomly, or the group might decide that each character
has an inspiring connection with the character of the player
sitting to the left and a challenging connection with the
character of the player sitting to the right.
Other players can reject a relationship connection they
don’t feel fits with their vision of their own character; in this
case, pick another character or a different relationship. Even
though you and the other characters share a connection,
only you add the skill feats from the relationships you roll
to your background options.

4121944

TABLE 4–9: INSPIRING RELATIONSHIP
1d12 Result
1
Animal Helpers When you and this character were
younger, you worked together to nurse sick animals
back to health. Add the Train Animal skill feat to
your background options.
2
Comrade-in-Arms You and this character were
once comrades in military service, and you trained
yourself and this character to improve your

190

18833998

4121945

4121945


Variant Rules

3

4

5

6

7

8

18833999

18833999

9

10

11

12

physical fitness. Add the Assurance skill feat for
Athletics to your background options.
Desperate Intimidation You had to frighten off
pirates or slavers looking to capture you and this
character. Add the Group Coercion skill feat to your
background options.
Homelessness At a time when you were both living
on the streets, you taught this character valuable
pointers to survive. Add the Streetwise skill feat to
your background options.
Kindly Witch This character connected you to a
kindly but reclusive person who was living at the
edge of civilization but had expansive knowledge to
share. Add the Natural Medicine skill feat to your
background options.
Liberators You and this character worked together
to free some captives—including one of your friends
or relatives—from a gang of slavers. Add the Lengthy
Diversion skill feat to your background options.
Magician This character supported your brief
dalliance with stage magic, which you took up as a
precursor to learning actual magic or simply to keep
your fingers nimble. Add the Subtle Theft skill feat to
your background options.
Missing Child When a young relative disappeared in
a busy market, this character helped you question
merchants and shoppers and find the child before
they came to any harm. Add the Hobnobber skill feat
to your background options.
Patron of the Arts This character encouraged you to
excel at a type of performance you loved, even going
so far as to support you in lean times. Add the Virtuosic
Performer skill feat to your background options.
Religious Students You and this character shared some
religious training in the past, even if you didn’t stick
with it, and you admired their piety. Add the Student of
the Canon skill feat to your background options.
Timely Cure When a family member of yours was
dying and there didn’t seem to be much hope, this
character brought a simple but effective alchemical
cure. You are determined to pay this favor forward.
Add the Alchemical Crafting skill feat to your
background options.
Wasteland Survivors You and this character
were lost in a dangerous wasteland together and
depended upon each other for survival; you’re still
not certain that either of you would have survived
the ordeal without the other’s aid. Add the Forager
skill feat to your background options.

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

TABLE 4–10: CHALLENGING RELATIONSHIP
1d12 Result
1
Accidental Fall This character once inadvertently
shoved you off a ledge or balcony. You’re mostly
certain it was a mistake, but the fall was terrifying,
and you’ve resolved to never be caught unaware

12

like that again. Add the Cat Fall skill feat to your
background options.
Accusation of Theft You were once secretly certain
that this character stole a cherished valuable from
you. You were determined to steal it back, until
you learned that this character wasn’t in fact to
blame and you’d only misplaced the item. Add the
Pickpocket skill feat to your background options.
Called Before Judges Information provided by this
character—either intentionally or inadvertently
given—required you to justify yourself in front of a
group of bureaucrats or magistrates. Add the Group
Impression skill feat to your background options.
Matter of Might You have long considered this
character your rival in a question of strength. You are
determined to prove yourself to be mightier, perhaps
by intelligent application of force if you aren’t
physically imposing. Add the Hefty Hauler skill feat
to your background options.
Mercantile Expertise To encourage an employer to
hire you instead of this character, you worked hard to
demonstrate your keen mercantile sense. It didn’t work;
the employer hired this character anyway. Add the
Bargain Hunter skill feat to your background options.
Privileged Position You once sought the favor of a
powerful spellcaster as a mentor, but this character
was plainly the mentor’s favorite, no matter how
hard you tried. Add the Quick Identification skill feat
to your background options.
Relationship Ender You once warned off an admirer
seeking this character’s affections. You still maintain
that the match would have been a poor one and
that you did this character a favor. Add the Quick
Coercion skill feat to your background options.
Rival Trackers You and this character worked for a
time as rival hunters, whether tracking animals or
escaped criminals. Add the Experienced Tracker skill
feat to your background options.
Seeking Accolades You never seemed to capture the
attention of the crowds at the tavern as easily as this
character did, so you worked hard to practice your
showmanship. Add the Impressive Performance skill
feat to your background options.
Slander You and this character were rivals for
the same person’s affections, and you stooped to
spreading vicious lies before the whole situation
fell apart. Add the Charming Liar skill feat to your
background options.
Social Maneuvering You have always wanted to prove
yourself better than this character in a fancy social
situation but have yet to decisively do so. Add the
Courtly Graces skill feat to your background options.
Spy You spied upon this character in the past, either
at the behest of someone else or because of your
own suspicions. Add the Read Lips skill feat to your
background options.

4
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121945

191

18833999

4121946

4121946


Gamemastery Guide

FEATS AND FEATURES

The Core Rulebook presents a character progression carefully designed to offer plenty of
options and depth without overwhelming players with too many choices at once. However,
you can use the Pathfinder rules to create an infinite number of variant progressions. If
your group wants more powerful characters, specific themes for all characters, or the like,
you can implement these variants.

DUAL-CLASS PCS

Sometimes, especially when you have a
particularly small play group or want to play
incredibly versatile characters, you might want
to allow dual-class characters that have the full
benefits of two different classes.

18834000

18834000

BUILDING A DUAL-CLASS CHARACTER
When building a dual-class character, the primary changes
to the character creation process are fairly straightforward.
Choose and implement your character’s ancestry and
background as normal. Then, when you get to the step
of choosing a class, select two classes and add everything
from each class except Hit Points and starting skills: initial
proficiencies, class features, class feats, extra skill feats
and skill increases for rogues, and so on. As always, use
the highest proficiency granted for a given statistic. For
instance, if one class gave you expert proficiency in Will
saves and the other gave you master proficiency in Will
saves, you would be a master in Will saves.
Use only the higher Hit Points per level from
the two classes. For starting skills, apply the
skills automatically granted by each class, and
then apply the larger number of additional skills.
For instance, a cleric of Shelyn/ranger would gain Hit
Points equal to 10 + their Constitution modifier per level,
start with the trained proficiency rank in Nature and
Survival from ranger and Religion and either Crafting
or Performance from cleric, and then gain a number
of additional skills of their choice equal to 4 + their
Intelligence modifier, since the ranger provides the trained
proficiency rank in more additional skills than the cleric
does (this example doesn’t include any skills they gained
from their background or other sources). This character
would also have the deity, divine spellcasting, divine font,
and doctrine class features from cleric plus the Hunt Prey,
hunter’s edge, and ranger feat class features from ranger.

4121946

Spells
Dual-class spellcasters get full access to all the
spells of any spellcasting classes they have.
For instance, a sorcerer/wizard gets five
cantrips in their spell repertoire from
sorcerer, five prepared cantrips from
wizard, three spontaneous 1st-level
spell slots from the sorcerer (with
three 1st-level spells in their repertoire),
and three 1st-level prepared spell slots from
wizard (or four, for a specialist). They keep
these spells entirely separate and get
the full benefits of both spellcasting
class features, even if both classes
use the same tradition.
Classes with focus pools get all the

192

18834000

4121947

4121947


Variant Rules

4
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18834001

18834001

4121947

Focus Points granted by all of them. These share one focus
pool as normal, with the standard cap of 3 maximum
Focus Points.

Character Advancement
A dual-class character gains the class feats and class
features for both classes at each level as they advance,
with the exception of ability boosts, general feats, skill
feats, and skill increases—the character gets each of these
benefits only once per level, since both classes would
provide the same benefit. (A dual-class rogue/ranger still
gets the extra skill feat and skill increase at levels where
the other class doesn’t provide them.)
If a character gains the same proficiency rank
in a statistic more than once, they still use only the
highest rank. In the example above, when the cleric
gets Alertness at 5th level, they wouldn’t change their
Perception rank, since it was already expert due to the
ranger’s initial proficiencies.

PLAYING WITH DUAL-CLASS CHARACTERS
Playing a dual-class character certainly gives a character
more options, and adding additional spellcasting classes
can result in a significantly wider variety of powerful
spell effects available to each character. Nonetheless,
this sort of dual-classing is more likely to increase the
party’s longevity than it is to drastically adjust the level

of opponents a dual-class character should be fighting.
The increases to saving throw proficiencies and Hit
Points make characters somewhat sturdier and able
to take on slightly higher challenges, but not every
fight should be harder, nor should encounters exceed
extreme-threat difficulty.
Dual-classing in two similar martial classes to double
up on their advantages can result in characters who,
instead of increasing their flexibility, become drastically
more powerful in one focus. For instance, a fighter/ranger
with the flurry hunter’s edge gains access to incredibly
accurate press actions, and a barbarian/fighter has the
barbarian’s high damage plus the fighter’s high accuracy.
One way around this is to simply disallow combinations
that double down on a narrow ability, and instead
encourage dual-class characters that open up narrative
options and increase the character’s flexibility. The other
solution is to raise the challenge from the opposition,
treating the party as if the characters were a level higher.
However, this is a choice that affects the whole group,
even if only one character is built to mow down foes.
Due to the increased number of class feats a dual-class
character has, you should limit how much of a benefit a
character gets from feats that scale based on the number
of feats you have, such as Resiliency feats from multiclass
archetypes. Typically, the limit should be half the number
of total class feats the character has.

193

18834001

4121948

4121948


Gamemastery Guide

FREE ARCHETYPE

18834002

Ancestry paragon characters have a bit more versatility
and power than other characters, though their extra
abilities are usually limited to themes the ancestry already
was suited for. It’s unlikely to affect the game balance of
combat encounters, but it might make exploration and
social challenges easier for the heroes.

BUILDING A CHARACTER

The variants presented so far have mostly been aimed at
groups looking to increase their nuance in exchange for
greater character complexity. However, sometimes players
are looking for something a little simpler instead, or want
to increase the complexity in one area and decrease it
elsewhere, keeping a rough balance. In games where a
character’s ancestry is only incidental and each PC is
more defined by their class and individual characteristics,
simplified ancestries allows your group to pick an ancestry
and go.

The only difference between a normal character and a
free-archetype character is that the character receives
an extra class feat at 2nd level and every even level
thereafter that they can use only for archetype feats.
Depending on the needs of the group and the theme of
the game, you might restrict the free feats to those of a
single archetype each character in the group has (for a
shared backstory), those of archetypes fitting a certain
theme (such as only ones from magical archetypes in a
game set in a magic school), or entirely unrestricted if
you just want a higher‑powered game.
If the group all has the same archetype or draws from a
limited list, you might want to ignore the free archetype’s
normal restriction of selecting a certain number of feats
before taking a new archetype. That way a character can
still pursue another archetype that also fits their character.

PLAYING WITH FREE ARCHETYPES

18834002

PLAYING WITH ANCESTRY PARAGON CHARACTERS

Sometimes the story of your game calls for a group
where everyone is a pirate or an apprentice at a magic
school. The free archetype variant introduces a shared
aspect to every character without taking away any of that
character’s existing choices. It can also provide a lighter
version of dual-class characters by giving everyone a free
multiclass archetype.

Free-archetype characters are a bit more versatile and
powerful than normal, but usually not so much that they
unbalance your game. However, due to the characters’
increased access to archetype feats, you should place a limit
on the number of feats that scale based on a character’s
number of archetype feats (mainly multiclass Resiliency
feats). Allowing a character to benefit from a number of
these feats equal to half their level is appropriate, as this
is the maximum number of feats you could use to take
archetype feats without this variant.

ANCESTRY PARAGON

SIMPLIFIED ANCESTRIES

BUILDING A SIMPLIFIED ANCESTRY CHARACTER
When choosing an ancestry for a simplified ancestry
character, you gain the ancestry’s normal abilities at 1st
level, choose a heritage, and gain the appropriate lore feat
(Dwarven Lore for dwarves, for example) as your ancestry
feat. Simplified ancestry characters never gain ancestry
feats beyond that first lore feat. If you want to keep the
power level of your game consistent, you can replace the
ancestry feats gained at higher levels with general feats.

SIMPLIFIED SKILL FEATS

The standard system gives feats specifically to spend on
skills to let PCs gain fun, skill-based options without
feeling like they had to sacrifice a feat that could have
improved their class’s core specialties. In some games,
especially those focused on combat with little exploration,
downtime, or social interaction, the PCs might have more
skill feats than they need. The simplified skill feats variant
allows you to reduce this aspect of decision-making.

Most characters have some elements that connect them to
their ancestry but identify more strongly with their class
or unique personality. Sometimes, though, a character is
the embodiment of their ancestry to the point that it’s
of equal importance to their class. For a game where
an ancestral background is a major theme and such
characters are the norm, your group might consider using
the ancestry paragon variant.

BUILDING A SIMPLIFIED SKILL FEAT CHARACTER

BUILDING AN ANCESTRY PARAGON CHARACTER

While you probably won’t need to adjust combat
challenges at all for simplified skill feat characters, skillbased challenges—especially social challenges—will be
tougher, especially at higher levels where it’s expected
characters will have more efficient skill-based abilities
due to skill feats. If you prefer more baseline difficulty,
you could adjust the expectations down slightly.

When creating an ancestry paragon character, instead of
starting with one ancestry feat and gaining another at
5th, 9th, 13th, and 17th levels, the character starts with
two ancestry feats and gains another at every odd level
thereafter (3rd, 5th, 7th, 9th, and so on) for a total of 11
ancestry feats.

4121948

Simplified skill feat characters don’t receive any skill feats,
even from their backgrounds. They still gain general feats
and can use those to select skill feats if they want a crucial
ability. You may want to allow rogues to gain skill feats,
but at the normal advancement most characters have,
instead of their usual double advancement.

PLAYING WITH SIMPLIFIED SKILL FEAT CHARACTERS

194

18834002

4121949

4121949

18834003

18834003


Variant Rules

LEVEL 0 CHARACTERS

Before they were heroes, every PC came from somewhere, whether they worked on a farm
like Valeros or picked pockets on the streets like Seelah. Sometimes, it can be a lot of fun
to play a prequel game years before the PCs’ first adventure as heroes, or you may have
an idea for a low-powered adventure that calls for commoners and apprentices. The rules
below provide ways to easily build and use level 0 PCs in your games.

BUILDING CHARACTERS

Building a level 0 character is similar to building a 1st-level
character, but you stop after choosing your ancestry and
background. A level 0 character still gets the four free
ability boosts from Step 6 of the normal character creation
process, but not the class ability boost.

INITIAL PROFICIENCIES
A level 0 character is trained in Perception, all saving
throws, unarmed attacks, unarmored defense, and one
simple weapon of their choice. Additionally, they
are trained in a number of skills equal to 2 +
their Intelligence modifier. The proficiency
bonus for a level 0 character works the same
way as normal, but since the level is 0, the
total proficiency bonus for being trained is +2.

HIT POINTS
A level 0 character adds their Constitution
modifier to their ancestry Hit Points to
determine their starting Hit Points.

STARTING MONEY
A level 0 character starts
with 5 gp (50 sp) to spend on
equipment.

APPRENTICE OPTION
If the story you want to tell is about
characters who have started training to
become a particular class, you can grant
them a small number of additional abilities.
An apprentice character is trained in the
skill or skills specified for their chosen class
(such as Occultism and Performance for
a bard) in addition to the skills they gain
through their initial proficiencies. They
also gain benefits based on the class.

Alchemist
An apprentice alchemist gains the advanced
alchemy ability of the alchemy class
feature. Their advanced alchemy
level is 1, and they have one
batch of infused reagents each
day. They can make only infused
alchemical items.

Monk
An apprentice monk gains the powerful fist class feature.

Other Martial Class
An apprentice of another martial class (barbarian,
champion, fighter, ranger, or rogue) is trained in light
armor, all simple weapons, and one martial weapon listed
in the class’s initial proficiencies. If a martial class not
listed here lacks light armor or martial weapon training
(as the monk does), give it a different ability as well.

4
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

Spellcaster
An apprentice spellcaster is trained in the appropriate
magic tradition and gains two cantrips from their class.
A prepared caster can’t change these cantrips each day.

GAMEPLAY

Combat can be especially dangerous for level
0 characters. For safety’s sake, you might
treat the characters as level –1 when
determining what combat encounters
are appropriate. For skill checks,
they can still accomplish tasks with
a simple trained DC using their
trained skills, but success is less
certain. Since they have fewer skills, the
party might not have anyone trained for a
given task.
If you’re playing these characters for more
than a few sessions, consider advancing them
to 1st level using the fast advancement speed
(800 XP). If your group wants a longer
experience at level 0, start the group without
the apprentice benefits, then level up to
apprentice (gaining those benefits and the
apprentice adjustments for their class), and
then level up to 1st level.

4121949

TREASURE
As the characters start with 5 gp, their
adventures up to 1st level should account for
the rest of a 1st-level character’s
starting money. That means you’ll
distribute treasure worth
10 gp × the number of PCs,
a large percentage of which
should be in currency.

195

18834003

4121950

4121950


Gamemastery Guide

MAGIC ITEM VARIANTS

Pathfinder’s magic item system is calibrated for a high-fantasy world like Golarion, with
plenty of access to magic. However, not all settings, games, or subgenres match those
assumptions. Varying from the default magic item system can help your group build games
in low-magic settings, where the availability of magic items is unreliable, or where most or
all of the power comes from the character and not their gear.

AUTOMATIC BONUS
PROGRESSION

This variant removes the item bonus to rolls and
DCs usually provided by magic items (with the
exception of armor’s item bonus) and replaces
it with a new kind of bonus—potency—to
reflect a character’s innate ability instead.
In this variant, magic items, if they
exist at all, can provide unique special
abilities rather than numerical increases.

Skill Potency

SPECIAL CLASS FEATURES
Every character automatically gains the
class features on Table 4–11: Automatic
Bonus Progression.

TABLE 4–11: AUTOMATIC BONUS
PROGRESSION
Level Benefits
1
—
2
Attack potency +1
3
Skill potency (one at +1)
4
Devastating attacks (two dice)
5
Defense potency +1
6
Skill potency (two at +1 each)
7
Perception potency +1
8
Saving throw potency +1
9
Skill potency (one at +2, one at +1)
10
Attack potency +2
11
Defense potency +2
12
Devastating attacks (three dice)
13
Perception potency +2; skill
potency (two at +2 each, one at +1)
14
Saving throw potency +2
15
Skill potency (three at +2 each, one
at +1)
16
Attack potency +3
17
Ability apex; skill potency (one at
+3, two at +2 each, two at +1 each)
18
Defense potency +3
19
Devastating attacks (four dice), Perception potency
+3
20 Saving throw potency +3; skill potency (two at +3
each, two at +2 each, two at +1 each)

18834004

18834004

attack rolls with all weapons and unarmed attacks. This
increases to +2 at 10th level, and +3 at 16th level.

Attack Potency

2nd

Starting at 2nd level, you gain a +1 potency bonus to

3rd

At 3rd level, choose a single skill. You gain
a +1 potency bonus with that skill. At 6th
level, choose a second skill to gain a +1
potency bonus. At 9th level, choose one
of those skills and increase its potency
bonus to +2. At 13th level, increase the
potency bonus of your second skill to
+2 and choose a third skill to gain a +1
potency bonus. At 15th level, increase
the third skill’s potency bonus to +2 and
choose a fourth skill to gain a +1 potency bonus.
At 17th level, choose one of your three skills with
a +2 potency bonus to increase to +3, and choose a
fifth skill to gain a +1 potency bonus. Finally, at 20th
level, choose one of the two skills with a +2 potency
bonus to increase to +3, choose one of the three skills at a
+1 potency bonus to increase to +2, and choose one new
skill to gain a +1 potency bonus. You can spend 1 week
to retrain one of these assignments at any time.

Devastating Attacks

4121950

4th

At 4th level, your weapon and unarmed Strikes deal
two damage dice instead of one. This increases to
three at 12th level and to four at 19th level.

Defense Potency

5th

At 5th level, you gain a +1 potency bonus to
AC. At 11th level, this bonus increases to
+2, and at 18th level, to +3.

Perception Potency

7th

At 7th level, you gain a +1 potency
bonus to Perception, increasing to +2 at level
13 and +3 at level 19.

Saving Throw Potency

8th

At 8th level, you gain a +1 potency bonus to saves,
increasing to +2 at level 14 and +3 at level 20.

Ability Apex

17th

At 17th level, choose one ability score to either
increase by 2 or increase to 18 (whichever grants the
higher score).

196

18834004

4121951

4121951

18834005

18834005


Variant Rules

4

TABLE 4–12: HIGH-QUALITY WEAPONS
Quality
Expert
Master
Legendary

Item Bonus
+1
+2
+3

Property Rune Slots
1
2
3

Item Level
2
10
16

Price
35 gp
935 gp
8,935 gp

Property Rune Slots
1
2
3

Item Level
5
11
18

Price
160 gp
1,060 gp
20,560 gp

TABLE 4–13: HIGH-QUALITY ARMOR
Quality
Expert
Master
Legendary

Bonus Increase
+1
+2
+3

TABLE 4–14: DEVASTATING WEAPONS
Quality
Item Bonus
Expert
+1
Expert devastating
+1
Master
+2
Master devastating
+2
Legendary
+3
Legendary devastating
+3

Damage Dice
1
2
2
3
3
4

Property Rune Slots
1
1
2
2
3
3

Item Level
2
4
10
12
16
19

Price
35 gp
100 gp
1,000 gp
2,000 gp
10,000 gp
40,000 gp

Save Bonus
—
+1
+1
+2
+2
+3

Property Rune Slots
1
1
2
2
3
3

Item Level
5
8
11
14
18
20

Price
160 gp
500 gp
1,400 gp
4,500 gp
24,000 gp
70,000 gp

introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

TABLE 4–15: RESILIENT ARMOR
Quality
Bonus Increase
Expert
+1
Expert resilient
+1
Master
+2
Master resilient
+2
Legendary
+3
Legendary resilient
+3

ADJUSTING ITEMS AND TREASURE

HIGH-QUALITY WEAPONS AND ARMOR

With this variant, you can ignore as much of Table
10–9: Party Treasure by Level on page 509 of the
Core Rulebook as you want, though you’ll usually
want to provide consistent currency. The main area
your choice will impact is in spellcasting items, such
as scrolls and wands.
Remove all potency runes, striking runes, and
resilient runes. Items that normally grant an item
bonus to statistics or damage dice no longer do, other
than the base item bonus to AC from armor. Apex
items do not increase ability scores. If your world
still includes magic items, a safe bet is to continue
to give out consumable items at roughly the rate on
Table 10–9 of the Core Rulebook.
If you choose to eliminate runes entirely, this can
reduce the PCs’ damage since they won’t have
runes like flaming or holy. If you’ve removed
nearly all treasure, challenges might become
more difficult, even with automatic bonuses.

High-quality weapons and armor give the same
benefits as weapon and armor potency runes (Tables
4–12 and 4–13). To remove magic from weapons
and armor, you can use the devastating attacks and
saving throw potency entries from the automatic
bonus progression variant, or you can have quality
also provide the effects of striking and resilient runes,
using Table 4–14 and Table 4–15. If you choose to
still have magic weapons and armor, the effects don’t
stack with quality.

HIGH-QUALITY

In this variant, gear can provide bonuses even if it’s
not magical. This is useful for games and settings
that set out to give fine, non-magical items the same
prominence as magic items. High-quality gear requires
the corresponding proficiency rank in Crafting to Craft.

4121951

HIGH-QUALITY SKILL ITEMS
Items with skill or Perception bonuses don’t have
fundamental runes. If an existing skill bonus item
costs less than the listed Price for a high‑quality skill
item or has a lower level, it likely has a feature
such as a limitation, so adjust accordingly. A
character in a game with this variant can Craft
or buy a non-magical item to boost Perception
or a skill using the table below.

TABLE 4–16: HIGH-QUALITY SKILL ITEM
Quality
Item Bonus
Expert
+1
Master
+2
Legendary
+3

Item Level
3
9
17

Price
40 gp
550 gp
11,000 gp

197

18834005

4121952

4121952


Gamemastery Guide

PROFICIENCY WITHOUT LEVEL

This variant presents a change to the proficiency bonus system, scaling it differently for a
style of game that’s outside the norm. This is a significant change to the system.

18834006

18834006

The proficiency rank progression in the Core Rulebook is
designed for heroic fantasy games where heroes rise from
humble origins to world-shattering strength. For some
games, this narrative arc doesn’t fit. Such games are about
hedging bets in an uncertain and gritty world, in which
even the world’s best fighter can’t guarantee a win against
a large group of moderately skilled brigands. In games
like these, your group might want to consider removing
the character’s level from the proficiency bonus.
The initial implementation is fairly straightforward:
the proficiency bonus just becomes +2 for trained, +4 for
expert, +6 for master, and +8 for legendary. We recommend
giving an untrained character a –2 proficiency modifier
instead of a +0 proficiency bonus.
Additionally, for creatures, hazards, magic items, and so
on, reduce each statistic that would include a proficiency
bonus by the level of the creature or other rules element.
These statistics are typically modifiers and DCs for attacks,
ACs, saving throws, Perception, skills, and spells.
Finally, decrease the skill DCs of most tasks to account
for the level being removed. You can just subtract the level
from the DC tables on page 503 of the Core Rulebook,
or you can reference Table 4–17: Simple Skill DCs (No
Level) for a set of DCs that’s easier to remember. The new
DCs make it a little harder for high-level characters to
succeed than it would be when using the default numbers
from the Core Rulebook, in keeping with the theme
mentioned earlier. Combat outcomes will tend to flatten
out, with critical successes and critical failures being less
likely across the game. This is particularly notable in
spells, where you’re less likely to see the extreme effects
of critical failures on saves.

from proficiency, this assumption is no longer true. The
XP budget for creatures uses a different scale, as shown
in Table 4–18: Creature XP (No Level). You’ll still use
the same XP budget for a given threat level as shown on
Table 10–1: Encounter Budget on page 489 of the Core
Rulebook (80 XP for a moderate-threat encounter, 120 for
a severe-threat encounter, and so on).

TABLE 4–17: SIMPLE SKILL DCS (NO LEVEL)

ADJUSTING TREASURE

Proficiency Rank
Untrained
Trained
Expert
Master
Legendary

DC
10
15
20
25
30

ADJUSTING ENCOUNTERS

Telling stories where a large group of low-level monsters
can still be a significant threat to a high-level PC (and
conversely, a single higher-level monster is not much of a
threat to a group of PCs) requires some significant shifts in
encounter building, including shifts in the PCs’ rewards.
Under the math in the Core Rulebook, two monsters
of a certain level are roughly as challenging as a single
monster 2 levels higher. However, with level removed

TABLE 4–18: CREATURE XP (NO LEVEL)
Creature’s Level
Party level – 7
Party level – 6
Party level – 5
Party level – 4
Party level – 3
Party level – 2
Party level – 1
Party level
Party level + 1
Party level + 2
Party level + 3
Party level + 4
Party level + 5
Party level + 6
Party level + 7

XP
9
12
14
18
21
26
32
40
48
60
72
90
108
135
160

4121952

While the XP values in Table 4–18 work well in most
cases, sometimes they might not account for the effects
of creatures’ special abilities when facing a party of a
drastically different level. For instance, a ghost mage could
prove too much for 5th-level PCs with its incorporeality,
flight, and high-level spells, even though it’s outnumbered.

Treasure and the cost of items in the Core Rulebook are
designed to make it as easy as possible for you to build
encounters without worrying about awarding too much or
too little treasure based on whether you use creatures who
carry items. However, using this variant, the PCs might
defeat a creature 5 levels higher than they are, or even
more! Too many encounters with higher-level foes can
wind up giving the PCs more treasure than you expected,
or vice-versa if they’re fighting weaker foes that put up
more of a fight but still have poor treasure. You can nudge
this in the right direction by making periodic adjustments if
the PCs’ treasure drifts too far from expectations. Making
it so they can’t easily sell or buy magic items will mean it’s
harder for them to exploit treasure they gain. To sidestep
the treasure economy entirely, you can use the automatic
item bonus progression, found on page 196.

198

18834006

4121953

4121953


Variant Rules

SKILL POINTS

introduction

The default progression of skill proficiency ranks is simple and doesn’t require many
mathematical calculations as a player assigns skills. However, some players prefer a more
granular system with a greater ability to diversify their skills. This variant allows characters
to assign their skill increases more flexibly, potentially having fewer skills at the highest
possible rank in exchange for more skills at a lower rank.

Gamemastery
Basics

ASSIGNING SKILL POINTS

Subsystems

At 1st level, a character using the Skill Points variant gains
their initial skill proficiencies as described in the Core
Rulebook. However, at every level beyond 1st, instead
of gaining skill increases, the character gains a number
of Skill Points, as indicated on Table 4–19: Skill Points
by Level. The character can spend these Skill Points to
increase their proficiency rank in various skills, as shown
on Table 4–20: Cost to Increase Rank. A character must
meet the minimum level indicated on the table to increase
their rank, primarily to avoid having a player becoming
unrealistically good at one skill early in their adventuring
career while neglecting everything else. Characters can
save up Skill Points between levels for a more expensive
increase later on.

SKILL POINTS IN PLAY

Players using Skill Points have more flexibility to build
characters with a broader range of skills in which they’re
trained or better than normal, and this variant encourages
that flexibility by increasing the cost of specializing. For
instance, a 19th-level fighter could use Skill Points to be
a master in seven different skills, or to
be legendary in three skills. While this
makes the variance in skills slightly
less predictable, it shouldn’t have a big
enough effect on a group’s capabilities
that you need to make any significant
adjustments when you run the game.

Tools

Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

TABLE 4–19: SKILL POINTS BY LEVEL
Level
1
2–5
6–13
14–20

18834007

18834007

4

Skill Points Gained
Initial proficiencies
1
2
4

4121953

TABLE 4–20: COST TO INCREASE RANK
Rank
Untrained to trained
Trained to expert
Expert to master
Master to legendary

Minimum Level
1
3
7
15

Skill Point Cost
1
2
4
8

ROGUES
Because rogues get skill increases at every level in the
standard rules, they also get more Skill Points. Rogues gain
double the number of Skill Points listed on Table 4–19.

RETRAINING
A character can retrain the proficiency ranks they gained
using Skill Points much as they would retrain a skill
increase under the normal rules. With a week of downtime,
a character can reduce their proficiency rank in one skill
by one step to get back the number of Skill Points spent
to gain that increase. For example, reducing a master
proficiency rank to expert would grant a character 4 Skill
Points. The character can then reassign those points as they
see fit or save them for later. Reducing proficiency ranks
for multiple skills or reducing a single proficiency rank by
multiple steps takes additional weeks of downtime.

199

18834007

4121954

4121954


Gamemastery Guide

In some fantasy stories, the heroes are able to avoid any serious
injury until the situation gets dire, getting by with a graze or a
flesh wound and needing nothing more than a quick rest to get
back on their feet. If your group wants to tell tales like those,
you can use the stamina variant to help make that happen.

STAMINA POINTS

Stamina Points represent a character’s energy and readiness. They’re reduced by
damage just like Hit Points, but a character always loses their Stamina Points first,
and loses Hit Points only if they’re out of Stamina Points. If a character takes damage
exceeding their remaining Stamina Points, the excess damage reduces their Hit Points.
However, they lose any temporary Hit Points before losing Stamina Points.
Though Stamina Points and Hit Points function similarly when a character takes
damage, a character recovers them differently. A heal spell restores Hit Points, not
Stamina Points, and the actions described below (like Take a Breather) restore only
Stamina Points, not Hit Points. A character regains all their Stamina Points after a
full night’s rest. Hit Points still determine whether a character remains conscious—a
character at 0 HP is unconscious, no matter how many Stamina Points they have.
In addition to their ancestry Hit Points, a PC gains the number of Stamina Points
and Hit Points indicated in the second and third columns of Table 4–21 at 1st level.
Both values increase by the same amount at each level thereafter. This replaces the
Hit Points a character gains from their class in a standard game.

RESOLVE POINTS

18834008

18834008

STAMINA

STAMINA’S IMPACT
The main gameplay consequence
of using these stamina rules is
that a quick 10- or 20-minute rest
can restore most groups to full
or nearly full health via Taking a
Breather and Treating Wounds
as necessary, allowing more
encounters with shorter breaks in
between. Additionally, charismatic
or otherwise diplomatic characters
gain fun and useful ways to bolster
their allies.
Because spells that heal Hit
Points don’t restore Stamina
Points, it’s a little harder to heal up
completely in the middle of a fight.
This can mean that fights become
deadly after characters have been
beaten down, possibly causing
retreats to be more frequent, but
the retreats themselves are shorter.
The focus of the game can stay
consistently within encounters,
with less managing of time and
resources outside of battle.

4121954

In this variant, each PC also has a pool of Resolve Points, representing their intrinsic
grit and luck. A character’s maximum Resolve Points is equal to their key ability
modifier, and a character regains all their Resolve Points with a full night’s rest. In
addition to spending Resolve Points to regain Stamina Points (as described under
Stamina Actions), characters can spend Resolve Points in the following way.

STABILIZE
If a character is dying at the start of their turn, their player can spend 1 Resolve
Point to stabilize at 0 HP, gaining or increasing the wounded condition as normal
for stabilizing. At the start of the character’s next turn, they gain 1 HP and wake up
(unless they started dying again). The character can act on that turn. Consider this
an optional rule best suited for groups that have little access to healing. When using
this rule, you might remove the ability for characters to use Hero Points to stabilize.

STAMINA ACTIONS
TAKE A BREATHER
EXPLORATION

Cost 1 Resolve Point
You rest for 10 minutes and recover your stamina. After you complete this activity, you
regain all your Stamina Points.

TABLE 4–21: STAMINA AND HIT POINTS BY CLASS
Normal Class HP
6 + Con modifier
8 + Con modifier
10 + Con modifier
12 + Con modifier

Class Stamina Points
3 + Con modifier
4 + Con modifier
5 + Con modifier
6 + Con modifier

Class Hit Points
3
4
5
6

Classes
Sorcerer, wizard
Alchemist, bard, cleric, druid, rogue
Champion, fighter, monk, ranger
Barbarian

200

18834008

4121955

4121955

18834009

18834009


Variant Rules

RALLY
AUDITORY

NO-LIMIT STAMINA
EMOTION

EXPLORATION LINGUISTIC MENTAL

Prerequisites trained in Diplomacy, Intimidation, or Performance
You spend 1 minute encouraging your ally. Though this action typically has the auditory
and linguistic traits, if you’re using the Performance skill, the GM might adjust the traits
for this action to match the traits for your type of performance.
Attempt a DC 15 skill check. The GM might adjust this DC based on the circumstances,
such as attempting to Rally an ally who just suffered a humiliating defeat.
Critical Success The ally can spend 1 Resolve Point to regain all their Stamina Points.
Success You can continue encouraging your ally for a total of 10 minutes. If you do, they
can spend 1 Resolve Point to regain all their Stamina Points.
Critical Failure The ally takes 1d8 mental damage, but this can reduce only Stamina
Points, never Hit Points.

STAMINA FEATS
ENCOURAGING WORDS [one-action]
AUDITORY

GENERAL

LINGUISTIC MENTAL

FEAT 2
SKILL

Prerequisites trained in Diplomacy
Requirements The target ally lost Stamina Points within the last round.
You give an ally within 30 feet a quick pep talk, helping them recover. Attempt a Diplomacy
check. The DC is usually 15, though the GM might adjust it based on the circumstances.
If you have expert proficiency in Diplomacy, you can instead
attempt a DC 20 check to increase the Stamina Points recovered
by 5; if you have master proficiency, you can attempt a DC 30
check to increase the Stamina Points by 15; if you have legendary
proficiency, you can attempt a DC 40 check to increase the
Stamina Points by 25. No matter the result, the ally is
temporarily immune to Encouraging Words until they
either Take a Breather or rest for the day.
Critical Success The ally recovers 2d8
Stamina Points.
Success The ally recovers 1d8 Stamina Points.
Critical Failure The ally takes 1d8 mental damage, but this
can reduce only Stamina Points, never Hit Points.

STEEL YOUR RESOLVE [one-action]

If you want a fast-paced, almost
superheroic game, you can skip the
Resolve Point component of this
subsystem and simply make Taking
a Breather and Rally free. This
gives the characters a lot of staying
power, meaning that the group will
typically keep adventuring until
they run out of spells for the day,
rather than having the additional
pressure of running out of Resolve
Points. If you use this approach,
omit the Steel Your Resolve feat, as
it’s too powerful if there’s no cost to
use it! Alternatively, if you want to
keep it, you can require a character
to Take a Breather before they can
Steel their Resolve again.

4
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121955

FEAT 3

GENERAL

Cost 1 Resolve Point
Regain Stamina Points equal to half your maximum.

OTHER CREATURES

There’s no need to give Stamina Points to
monsters that are expected to be encountered
once and likely defeated. However, you might
use Stamina Points for a recurring character,
especially an NPC who fights alongside the
PCs. Usually, it’s easiest to turn half the
creature’s Hit Points into Stamina Points.
While enemy healers still work as they’re
intended to, players might be upset about
the enemies’ ability to heal their allies to
full Hit Points, while the PCs are left not
being able to heal their allies’ Stamina
Points. In this case, give more enemies
Stamina Points to compensate.

201

18834009

4121956

4121956


Gamemastery Guide

18834010

18834010

4121956

202

18834010

4121957

4121957

18834011

18834011


NPC Gallery

CHAPTER 5: NPC GALLERY

Monsters and PCs aren’t the only inhabitants of your world. Though they might not be
heroes, NPCs can play various roles in your game, such as calling PCs to adventure, serving
as obstacles in social encounters, or opposing PCs in battle. This chapter presents almost a
hundred NPCs for your game, plus rules to modify them to fit any particular niche.

5
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools

USING THE NPC GALLERY

In this section, you’ll find all kinds of NPCs across a variety of categories and roles
for you to use in your game. Their levels span from –1 to 8, the range you most
often need for stock characters. Since high-level opponents, major villains, ruling
monarchs, and the like tend to be unique individuals, you’ll likely create those
NPCs specifically for the role they serve, using the rules for Building Creatures on
page 56. But you can never have too many lower-level NPCs on hand when the
PCs unexpectedly take an unusually keen interest in an NPC or pick a fight at a
roadside tavern.
The level listed on an NPC’s stat block is their level assuming they’re used in
combat; they should be able to hold their own as well as any other creature of that
level. But many of these NPCs are primarily noncombatants who are much more
skilled in their occupation than they ever would be in combat. To that end, those
specialist NPCs’ entries also mention a higher level that you would use when the
PCs have to compete against them in their area of expertise.

CUSTOMIZING NPCS
The NPCs in this gallery are all humans with no languages besides Common. In
some cases, such as human-centric Taldor where Common is the official language,
you can most likely use the NPCs in this section as written. But more often, you’ll
need to make minor adjustments to the details to portray a particular NPC.
Since these stat blocks present the most basic possible version for each character,
you shouldn’t need to remove any statistics or abilities unless your NPC can’t
speak Common.
The next few sections provide guidelines and ancestry adjustments you can use
to quickly customize a default NPC.

CHAPTER MAP
The chapter divides NPCs into 18
sections to make it easier for you to
find the types of characters you need
for your game.
• Courtiers (page 206)
• Criminals (page 208)
• Devotees (page 212)
• Downtrodden (page 214)
• Explorers (page 216)
• Foresters (page 218)
• Healers (page 220)
• Laborers (page 222)
• Magistrates (page 224)
• Mercenaries (page 226)
• Mystics (page 228)
• Officers (page 232)
• Performers (page 236)
• Publicans (page 238)
• Scholars (page 240)
• Seafarers (page 242)
• Tradespeople (page 244)
• Villains (page 246)

Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121957

ADJUSTING LEVEL
Sometimes you’ll need an NPC that fills a particular role—say an angry drunk—
but the level in the stat block presented isn’t the right fit for your group. You can
start by applying the elite or weak adjustments on page 6 of the Bestiary to adjust
the NPC’s level by 1 in either direction.
If you need to change the NPC’s level beyond that, use the values from the tables
in Building Creatures in Chapter 2, and add or remove special abilities as necessary
to suit the NPC’s new level.

CHANGING ALIGNMENT
Aside from some obviously aligned NPCs, like the villains, most of the NPCs in
this gallery are presented as neutral. If you want to change an NPC’s alignment,
all you have to do is change their alignment trait. You might consider how the
new alignment affects the NPC’s personality and adjust their skills accordingly;
for instance, a lawful evil teacher might have a higher modifier for Intimidation
than Diplomacy.

CHANGING LANGUAGES
If you need a human character who speaks more languages to fit their backstory,
nation of origin, or role, simply add those languages.

203

18834011

4121958

4121958


Gamemastery Guide

ORGANIZATION AND
DEITY TEMPLATES
In addition to the templates in this
book, the Pathfinder Lost Omens
Character Guide presents theme
templates to quickly and easily make
these NPCs members of various
organizations (see Theme Templates
on page 116). If you’re looking
for adherents of a specific deity,
Pathfinder Lost Omens Gods & Magic
offers a theme template (see Theme
Templates on page 9) that allows you
to customize an NPC to fit any deity,
or a deity of your own creation!

To use one of the NPCs in this section to represent an NPC of a different ancestry, apply
the adjustments below for the desired ancestry. These provide the basic features from
that ancestry, like darkvision, altered Speed, and unique abilities like a halfling’s keen
eyes. For other ancestries, you can create similar templates following the same format.
In addition to these base changes, you can add the effects of a specific heritage: you
might apply the snow goblin heritage if your NPC is a Frostfur goblin and you want
them to have cold resistance. You can also give them an ancestry feat, or even adjust
their ability scores and skills to reflect the new ancestry’s strengths and weaknesses.
For a half-elf, half-orc, or any other heritage essential to the character, you
should always apply the heritage effect.

Dwarf
• Change the human trait to dwarf.
• Add Dwarven to the NPC’s languages.
• Add darkvision.
• Decrease the NPC’s Speed by 5 feet. If the NPC already has a reduced Speed due
to their armor, consider applying the Unburdened Iron ancestry feat.

Elf
• Change the human trait to elf.
• Add Elven to the NPC’s languages.
• Add low-light vision.
• Increase the NPC’s Speed by 5 feet.

Gnome
• Change the human trait to gnome.
• Add Gnomish and Sylvan to the NPC’s languages.
• Add low-light vision.

18834012

18834012

NPC ANCESTRY ADJUSTMENTS

4121958

Goblin
• Change the human trait to goblin.
• Add Goblin to the NPC’s languages.
• Add darkvision.

Halfling
• Change the human trait to halfling.
• Add Halfling to the NPC’s languages.
• Add the keen eyes ability below.

KEEN EYES
Your eyes are sharp, allowing you to make out small details about concealed or even
invisible creatures that others might miss. You gain a +2 circumstance bonus when using
the Seek action to find hidden or undetected creatures within 30 feet of you. When you
target an opponent that is concealed from you or hidden from you, reduce the DC of the
flat check to 3 for a concealed target or 9 for a hidden one.

MAKING A SPECIALIST
These NPCs contain several specialists, such as barristers and navigators, who are a
higher-level challenge at their specialty than in combat, and often have a special ability
related to it. To make your own specialists, you can easily switch out skills, but you
might want to use the following special abilities to make those NPCs more evocative!
Butter Up (emotion, mental) When someone eats a dish or treat made by this NPC, the NPC
can attempt a Baking Lore, Cooking Lore, or similar check against that creature’s Will DC,
with the same results as the Make an Impression action of Diplomacy. If more than one
creature partakes, the NPC uses the same check result against each creature’s Will DC.

204

18834012

4121959

4121959

18834013

18834013


NPC Gallery

TABLE 5–1: NPCS
NPC
Acolyte of Nethys
Acrobat
Adept
Advisor
Antipaladin
Apothecary
Apprentice
Archer sentry
Assassin
Astronomer
Bandit
Barkeep
Barrister
Beast tamer
Beggar
Bodyguard
Bosun
Bounty hunter
Burglar
Captain of the guard
Charlatan
Chronicler
Commoner
Cult leader
Cultist
Dancer
Demonologist
Despot
Dockhand
Drunkard
Executioner
False priest
Farmer
Fence
Gang leader
Grave robber
Gravedigger
Guard
Guide
Guildmaster
Harbormaster
Harrow reader

Level
1
2
–1
5
5
–1 (3)*
–1
2
8
2
2
1
–1 (4)*
4
–1
1
3
4
4
6
3
3
–1
7
1
1
7
5
0
2
6
4
0
5
7
1
1
1
4
8 (12)*
3
–1 (3)*

Page
212
236
228
207
247
220
244
233
211
241
208
238
232
237
214
226
243
226
210
234
209
216
214
230
228
236
231
248
222
239
235
229
222
210
249
208
223
232
216
245
225
228

Call Your Bluff When gambling, the NPC may use Games Lore to
Sense Motive instead of Perception.
Child Care When treating infants, the NPC can use their
Midwifery Lore skill in place of Medicine, and can use
Medicine’s trained actions on infants.
Find Footing [one-action] (concentrate) The NPC attempts an
Architecture Lore, Engineering Lore, or similar skill check
to find a stable path across uneven ground. This grants
them and anyone they share this information with a +2
circumstance bonus on Acrobatics checks to Balance across
that ground.

Hunter
7
219
Innkeeper
1
239
Jailer
3
233
Judge
–1 (6)*
224
Librarian
–1 (3)*
240
Mage for hire
3
226
Mastermind
4 (7)*
246
Merchant
–1 (4)*
244
Miner
0
223
Monster hunter
6
227
Navigator
2 (4)*
242
Necromancer
5
230
Noble
3
206
Palace guard
4
206
Physician
–1 (4)*
220
Pirate
2
242
Plague doctor
5
221
Poacher
2
218
Priest of Pharasma
6
213
Prisoner
1
215
Prophet
2
212
Reckless scientist
6
248
Ruffian
2
209
Saboteur
2
246
Sage
6
241
Servant
–1
222
Server
–1
238
Ship captain
6
243
Smith
3 (6)*
245
Spy
6
207
Surgeon
2 (6)*
220
Tax collector
–1 (3)*
224
Teacher
–1 (4)*
240
Tomb raider
5
217
Torchbearer
0
216
Tracker
3
218
Troubadour
3
237
Urchin
–1
215
Warden
6
225
Watch officer
3
234
Zealot of Asmodeus
4
212
* This NPC is a higher-level challenge in their area of
expertise. The NPC’s level during such a challenge is listed
in parentheses.

5
introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121959

Gone Fishing The NPC can use Fishing Lore to Track aquatic
creatures or to Aid checks to Track them.
Local Lore When they first meet a given person from their
home settlement, the NPC can automatically attempt one
check to Recall Knowledge about that person. This uses the
Lore skill for that settlement.
Quick Transcription The NPC can attempt to copy a
document faster than normal, provided they don’t
alter the content. They attempt a Scribing Lore check,
completing the task in half the time on a success (onequarter on a critical success).

205

18834013

4121960

4121960


Gamemastery Guide

COURTIERS
RANKS OF NOBILITY
Some noble ranks, from highest to
lowest: king/queen, grand duke/
grand duchess, duke/duchess,
marquess, count/countess,
landgrave, viscount/viscountess,
baron/baroness, baronet/
baronetess, tribune, lord/
lady, knight

NOBLE
Envied by many and detested by still others, nobles exude confidence and
gentility. Gossip and gambling are often nobles’ favorite pastimes. Day-to-day
life for a noble is often a mixture of business and leisure, and to an onlooker,
such a lifestyle can appear to be nothing more than a string of meals, parties,
and game halls. However, despite what some might believe, life as a noble is
often quite dangerous and requires far more intellect than it
would appear—along with a healthy dose of suspicion.

NOBLE
N

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 3
HUMANOID

Perception +11
Languages Common
Skills Deception +10, Diplomacy +10, Gambling Lore +8, Intimidation +9
Str +2, Dex +3, Con +1, Int +1, Wis +2, Cha +4
Items fashionable fine clothes, loaded dice, rapier, silver flask, signet ring
Lip Reader After years of sticking their nose where it doesn’t belong, the noble
has learned to read lips from afar, with the effects of the Lip Reader feat (Core
Rulebook 265).
AC 18; Fort +6, Ref +10, Will +11
HP 45
Speed 25 feet
Melee  rapier +12 (deadly 1d8, disarm, finesse), Damage 1d6+5 piercing
Melee  fist +12 (agile, finesse, nonlethal), Damage 1d4+5 bludgeoning
Noble’s Ruse  Frequency once per round; Effect The noble Feints. On a success, the
noble Strikes the target.
Sneak Attack The noble deals an extra 1d6 precision damage to flat-footed creatures.

18834014

18834014

Though adventurers travel through perilous dungeons and across treacherous
wilderness, sometimes the most dangerous place they can end up is in a noble court.

4121960

PALACE GUARD
Every palace has its gatekeepers. Often the younger offspring of minor nobility or
those from long lines of trusted staff, the palace guards are in charge of defending
the royal family and their inner stronghold. Their days consist of guarding
doorways, escorting nobles to various locations, and keeping those in their
charge as safe as possible. The statistics below are for the lowest rank‑and-file
member of a small nation’s palace guards; they also work well for elite guards of
a lesser noble.

PALACE GUARD	
N

PALACE GUARD

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 4

HUMANOID

Perception +15
Languages Common
Skills Athletics +12, Diplomacy +10, Intimidation +8
Str +4, Dex +2, Con +3, Int +0, Wis +4, Cha +2
Items chain mail with palace insignia, halberd, simple manacles
AC 22; Fort +13, Ref +8, Will +10
HP 60
Attack of Opportunity 
Speed 25 feet
Melee  halberd +14 (reach, versatile S), Damage 1d10+7 piercing
Melee  fist +12 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d4+7 bludgeoning
Royal Defender Ever loyal, the palace guard gains a +2 circumstance bonus to attack rolls
when defending their liege.

206

18834014

4121961

4121961

18834015

18834015


NPC Gallery

ADVISOR
Trusted counselors of the court, advisors whisper words of guidance in the ears of
those in power. Many nobles lean so heavily on their counsel that they make few
decisions without them and insist on their attendance at all meetings and public events.
Advisors are often master manipulators, and their guidance can shape a barony or even
a kingdom—for good or ill.

ADVISOR
N

MEDIUM

CREATURE 5
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +14
Languages Common
Skills Deception +15, Diplomacy +15, Legal Lore +11, Occultism +9, Performance +11, Society +11
Str +0, Dex +2, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +4, Cha +4
Items dagger (2), fine clothes, small harp, minor healing potion, whip
Placate An advisor is well versed in soothing agitated nobles. Their calming voice gives
them a +2 circumstance bonus to Deception and Diplomacy checks when dealing with
members of the nobility.
AC 21; Fort +9, Ref +11, Will +15
HP 56
Speed 25 feet
Melee  whip +11 (disarm, finesse, nonlethal, reach, trip), Damage 1d4+2 slashing
Ranged  dagger +11 (agile, thrown 10 feet, versatile S), Damage 1d4+2
piercing
Occult Spontaneous Spells DC 22, attack +13; 3rd (2 slots) mind reading,
soothe, zone of truth; 2nd (3 slots) augury, restoration, soothe, touch of
idiocy; 1st (3 slots) charm, mage armor, magic missile, soothe; Cantrips
(3rd) chill touch, daze, light, prestidigitation, shield
Bard Composition Spells 1 Focus Point, DC 22; 3rd counter performance, Cantrips
(3rd) inspire competence, inspire courage, inspire defense (Core Rulebook 386)

5
introduction

INTRIGUING PLOTS
The royal court is filled with
intrigue! Here are some examples
of who might be scheming.
• The monarch’s spouse or children
• The royal pet (a druid in disguise)
• The grand vizier
• Visiting ambassadors or nobles
• Palace champion
• Palace doctor
• Kitchen staff
• Court jester

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121961

SPY
No empire would be complete without its spies. The spy is a master of infiltrating
the court and blending in: they might be one of a number of nobles, a beloved
confidante of the queen, or even the court jester. Spies use their skills to subtly
manipulate courtiers, turn enemies against one another, and collect valuable
information either for blackmail or to auction to the highest bidder.

SPY
N

CREATURE 6
MEDIUM

HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +17
Languages Common
Skills Deception +15, Diplomacy +13, Intimidation +15, Local Court Lore +16, Society +12,
Stealth +14, Thievery +12
Str +0, Dex +4, Con +1, Int +2, Wis +4, Cha +4
Items dagger (4), disguise kit, fine clothes, leather armor, +1 rapier, thieves’ tools
Noble’s Ally The spy has positioned themself to seem a trusted ally, gaining a
+2 circumstance bonus to Gather Information or to Make an Impression among the
nobles of that court.
AC 23; Fort +11, Ref +17, Will +14
HP 90
Speed 25 feet
Melee  rapier +16 (deadly 1d8, disarm, finesse, magical), Damage 1d6+7 piercing
Melee  dagger +14 (agile, thrown 10 feet, versatile S), Damage 1d4+6 piercing
Hidden Blade  Frequency once per round; Effect The spy draws a weapon and
then Strikes with it. The target of the Strike is flat-footed against the attack.
Sneak Attack The spy deals an extra 2d6 precision damage to flat-footed creatures.

SPY

207

18834015

4121962

4121962


Gamemastery Guide

CRIMINALS
CRIMINAL SCAMS
Common scams criminals run
include sending fake collectors
for nonexistent charities to seek
donations for the diseased and
downtrodden; rigged games of
chance at local fairs offering
worthless prizes, and flashy
sideshows concealing the work of
pickpockets in the audience; and
plants who offer to help travelers
find accommodations but lead them
to inns with exorbitant prices.

Some criminals are the desperate who have no option but to break the law to
survive, while others choose a life of crime for thrills, forming gangs or underworld
guilds that specialize in certain illegal ventures.

GRAVE ROBBER
Many cultures have a tradition of burying their dead with a selection of the deceased’s
most precious possessions, and some include gifts that are thought to provide a boon
in the afterlife. Such valuables can be easy pickings for those with no respect for—or
fear of—the dead.

GRAVE ROBBER
NE

MEDIUM

CREATURE 1

HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +5
Languages Common
Skills Crafting +6, Deception +2, Intimidation +2, Society +6, Stealth +5, Underworld Lore +6
Str +1, Dex +2, Con +2, Int +3, Wis +2, Cha −1
Items alchemist’s tools, dagger, formula book, holy water, shovel, studded leather armor
Infused Items A grave robber carries the following infused items: 2 lesser bottled
lightnings, a lesser frost vial, and a lesser thunderstone. These items last for 24 hours,
or until the next time the grave robber makes their daily preparations.
AC 17; Fort +7, Ref +7, Will +5
HP 18
Speed 25 feet
Melee  shovel +6, Damage 1d6+1 bludgeoning
Ranged  alchemical bomb +7 (range increment 20 feet, splash), Damage
varies by bomb

18834016

18834016

4121962

BANDIT
By setting ambushes and traps in concealing countryside, such as
forests and mountains, bandits waylay travelers and plunder their
valuables before disappearing back to their wilderness hideouts.
Many bandits seek only to steal and release their victims alive,
though a few prefer to leave no witnesses.

BANDIT
NE

BANDIT

MEDIUM

CREATURE 2
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +6
Languages Common
Skills Athletics +6, Deception +5, Forest Lore +4, Intimidation +6, Stealth +8,
Survival +6, Thievery +8
Str +3, Dex +3, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +1
Items hatchet, sling (10 bullets), studded leather armor
AC 19; Fort +7, Ref +9, Will +6
HP 30
Bandit’s Ambush When the bandit rolls initiative using Deception or Stealth,
they can attempt to Demoralize one creature as a free action.
Speed 25 feet
Melee  hatchet +9 (agile, sweep), Damage 1d6+5 slashing
Ranged  sling +9 (propulsive, range increment 50 feet, reload 1), Damage
1d6+3 bludgeoning
Ranged  hatchet +9 (agile, sweep, thrown 10 feet), Damage 1d6+5
slashing
Dread Striker Frightened creatures are flat-footed to the bandit.
Favored Terrain The bandit ignores the effects of non-magical difficult
terrain in forests.

208

18834016

4121963

4121963

18834017

18834017


NPC Gallery

RUFFIAN
Using their strength to bully others into submission, ruffians often work as
bodyguards and enforcers for powerful criminals like charlatans and fences.

RUFFIAN
NE

MEDIUM

CREATURE 2
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +8
Languages Common
Skills Athletics +7, Intimidation +6, Stealth +6
Str +3, Dex +2, Con +3, Int −1, Wis +2, Cha +0
Items club, sling (10 bullets), studded leather armor
AC 18; Fort +9, Ref +8, Will +6
HP 32
Attack of Opportunity 
Speed 25 feet
Melee  club +9, Damage 1d6+5 bludgeoning
Ranged  sling +8 (propulsive, range increment 50 feet, reload 1), Damage 1d6+5 bludgeoning
Ranged  club +8 (thrown 10 feet), Damage 1d6+5 bludgeoning
Brutal Beating The ruffian’s brutality shakes foes’ confidence. When the ruffian
deals damage on a critical hit, the target is frightened 1, and the ruffian can knock
the target up to 10 feet away (this is forced movement).
Snagging Strike  Trigger The ruffian has one hand free, and its target is within
reach of that hand; Effect The ruffian makes a melee Strike while
keeping one hand free. If this Strike hits, the target is flat-footed until
the start of the ruffian’s next turn or until it leaves the ruffian’s reach,
whichever comes first.
Sneak Attack The ruffian deals an extra 1d6 precision damage to flat-footed
creatures.

5
introduction

MORE SCAMS
• Fraudsters sell fake alchemical
items, medicines, charms,
talismans, or other minor magics.
• Unscrupulous moneylenders
take advantage of lax business
regulations to employ predatory
repayment terms.
• Phony fortune-tellers and
mediums use cold-reading
techniques to lull gullible marks.

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121963

CHARLATAN
Charlatans use pretense and misdirection to swindle money and other valuables
from the credulous and confused. Selling snake oil (literally or figuratively),
distracting marks to pick their pockets, or faking mediumship are classic grifts.

CHARLATAN
NE

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 3
HUMANOID

Perception +6
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +8, Deception +11, Diplomacy +9, Occultism +7, Performance
+11, Society +7, Stealth +8, Thievery +8, Underworld Lore +9
Str +0, Dex +3, Con +0, Int +2, Wis +1, Cha +4
Items disguise kit, lute, sap, shortsword, thieves’ tools
Versatile Performance The charlatan can use Performance instead of Diplomacy to Make
an Impression and instead of Intimidation to Demoralize. They can also use an acting
Performance instead of Deception to Impersonate.
AC 18; Fort +5, Ref +8, Will +10
HP 40
Speed 25 feet
Melee  shortsword +10 (agile, versatile S), Damage 1d6+2 piercing
Melee  sap +7 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d6+2 bludgeoning
Occult Spontaneous Spells DC 20, attack +10; 2nd (2 slots) charm, illusory disguise,
invisibility; 1st (3 slots) illusory disguise, magic aura, unseen servant, ventriloquism;
Cantrips (2nd) daze, ghost sound, mage hand, message, prestidigitation
Bard Composition Spells 1 Focus Point, DC 19; 1st counter performance (Core Rulebook
386); Cantrips (1st) inspire courage (Core Rulebook 386)
Sneak Attack The charlatan deals an extra 1d6 precision damage to flat-footed creatures.

CHARLATAN

209

18834017

4121964

4121964


Gamemastery Guide

BURGLAR
FANTASY CRIMES
While many crimes in Pathfinder
are similar to crimes in the real
world, certain crimes are possible
only in a world of magic. These
include using magic to win a wager,
malicious uses of curses, violating
autonomy with enchantment
magic, falsifying divinations,
violating privacy with divinations,
or trespassing via teleportation.

18834018

18834018

Burglars specialize in breaking and entering to rob homes and businesses. These
criminals focus on gaining access to secure buildings and bypassing traps and other
security measures while remaining undetected all the while.

BURGLAR
NE

MEDIUM

CREATURE 4
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +10 (+11 to find traps)
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +10, Athletics +8, Deception +7, Society +7, Stealth +12, Thievery +12 (can
Disable traps that require master proficiency), Underworld Lore +7
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +1, Int +1, Wis +2, Cha +1
Items climbing kit, composite shortbow (10 arrows), lesser darkvision elixir, leather armor,
sap, thieves’ tools
AC 21 (22 vs. traps); Fort +7, Ref +12, Will +10; +1 circumstance to all saves vs. traps
HP 60
Deny Advantage The burglar isn’t flat-footed to creatures of 4th level or lower that
are hidden, undetected, flanking, or using surprise attack.
Nimble Dodge  Trigger The burglar is targeted with a melee or ranged attack
by an attacker it can see; Effect The burglar gains a +2 circumstance bonus to AC
against the triggering attack.
Speed 30 feet
Melee  shortsword +14 (agile, finesse, versatile S), Damage
1d6+6 piercing
Melee  sap +12 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d6+4 bludgeoning
Ranged  composite shortbow +14 (deadly 1d10, propulsive, range
increment 60 feet, reload 0), Damage 1d6+4 piercing
Mobility When the burglar Strides half their Speed or less, that
movement does not trigger reactions.
Sneak Attack The burglar deals an extra 1d6 precision damage to flatfooted creatures.
Surprise Attack On the first round of combat, if the burglar rolls Deception
or Stealth for initiative, creatures that haven’t acted are flat-footed to them.

4121964

FENCE
The longer criminals hold on to stolen loot, the greater the chance they will get
caught. Fences make themselves indispensable in the underworld by paying
for stolen goods in order to resell them later, whether through a seemingly
legitimate business or to a closed group of elite buyers.

FENCE
NE

BURGLAR

MEDIUM

CREATURE 5
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +11
Languages Common
Skills Accounting Lore +13, Acrobatics +10, Crafting +13, Deception +13,
Diplomacy +11, Intimidation +11, Society +11, Stealth +10, Thievery +10, Underworld
Lore +15
Str +0, Dex +3, Con +0, Int +4, Wis +2, Cha +4
Items dagger (10), lesser darkvision elixir, disguise kit, bird feather token, lesser
smokestick (2), shortsword, thieves’ tools
Fence’s Eye Fences live by their ability to recognize a viable trade. They can use
Underworld Lore to identify an item’s value and Identify Magic on an item.
They gain a +2 circumstance bonus to Underworld Lore checks when doing
so, and to Underworld Lore checks to determine whether an item was stolen,
whether a stolen item would be too recognizable to easily move, and who would be
interested in purchasing such an item.

210

18834018

4121965

4121965

18834019

18834019


NPC Gallery

AC 20; Fort +9, Ref +12, Will +15
HP 70
Speed 25 feet
Melee  shortsword +12 (agile, finesse, versatile S), Damage 1d6+5 piercing
Melee  dagger +12 (agile, finesse, versatile S), Damage 1d4+5 piercing
Ranged  dagger +12 (agile, thrown 10 feet, versatile S), Damage 1d4+2 piercing
Quick Rummage  The fence always has a few items close at hand. The fence Interacts
to draw a weapon or item that takes a single action to activate, and then Strikes with
the weapon or Activates the Item.
Scoundrel’s Feint When the fence successfully Feints, their target is flat-footed against
the fence’s attacks until the end of the fence’s next turn. On a critical success, the target
is flat-footed against all attacks until the end of the fence’s next turn.
Sneak Attack The fence deals an extra 2d6 precision damage to flat-footed creatures.

introduction

PROTECTION MONEY
Criminal organizations often find it
easier to demand protection money
from locals than go to the trouble
of stealing it. “Protection” includes
an implicit assumption that those
who pay up are safe from those
criminals, and some also promise
retribution against other criminals.

MEDIUM

Tools
Subsystems

NPC Gallery

Assassins commit murder, either for pay or due to their belief in a cause, such as
a religion or a political movement. Some assassins work alone and choose their
own victims. Others are members of assassins’ guilds, organizations that accept
contracts to kill in return for money, favors, or both.

NE

Gamemastery
Basics

Variant Rules

ASSASSIN

ASSASSIN

5

GLOSSARY
and INDEX

CREATURE 8
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +16
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +17, Athletics +13, Deception +12, Diplomacy +10, Intimidation
+10, Medicine +14, Society +12, Stealth +19, Survival +12, Thievery +15,
Underworld Lore +14
Str +3, Dex +5, Con +2, Int +2, Wis +2, Cha +0
Items +1 striking composite shortbow (20 arrows), lesser darkvision elixir, giant
centipede venom (3), invisibility potion, leather armor, +1 rapier, simple injury
poison (8 doses, 2d4 poison damage), sleep poison (2)
Swift Sneak The assassin can move their full Speed when Sneaking.
AC 26; Fort +12, Ref +19, Will +14
HP 130
Deny Advantage The assassin isn’t flat-footed to creatures of
8th level or lower that are hidden, undetected, flanking, or
using surprise attack.
Nimble Dodge  Trigger The assassin is targeted with a
melee or ranged attack by an attacker they can see;
Effect The assassin gains a +2 circumstance bonus
to AC against the triggering attack.
Speed 25 feet
Melee  rapier +18 (deadly 1d8, disarm, finesse,
magical), Damage 1d6+8 piercing
Ranged  composite shortbow +20 (deadly 2d10,
magical, propulsive, range increment 60 feet,
reload 0), Damage 2d6+4 piercing
Poison Weapon  (manipulate) Requirements The assassin is wielding
a piercing or slashing weapon and has a free hand; Effect The
assassin applies a poison to the weapon.
Quick Draw  The assassin Interacts to draw a weapon, then Strikes with
that weapon.
Sneak Attack The assassin deals an extra 2d6 precision damage to flat-footed
creatures.
Surprise Attack On the first round of combat, creatures that haven’t acted yet are flatfooted to the assassin.

4121965

FENCE

211

18834019

4121966

4121966


Gamemastery Guide

DEVOTEES
SWAPPING DEITIES
Customize an acolyte or priest by
matching their deity’s alignment
and favored weapon, adding the
deity’s divine skill at +14 (or +7), and
swapping spells. An example appears
on the facing page. (An acolyte gains
only the 1st-level spells, domain spell,
and cantrips, and has two 1st-level
heal spells instead of three 3rd-level
heal spells.) If you swap harm spells
for heal, replace Healing Hands with
the Selective Energy cleric feat.

ACOLYTE
Underling clerics are still learning the tenets of their faith and answer to a superior
priest. Their days are spent in devotion and learning, sequestered in temples.

ACOLYTE OF NETHYS
N

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 1

HUMANOID

Perception +7
Languages Common
Skills Arcana +5, Crafting +5, Diplomacy +4, Occultism +5, Religion +7
Str +1, Dex +2, Con –1, Int +2, Wis +4, Cha +1
Items crossbow (10 bolts), religious symbol of Nethys, religious text of Nethys, staff
AC 15; Fort +2, Ref +5, Will +9
HP 16
Speed 25 feet
Melee  staff +4 (two-hand d8), Damage 1d4+1 bludgeoning
Ranged  crossbow +5 (range increment 120 feet, reload 1), Damage 1d8 piercing
Divine Prepared Spells DC 17, attack +9; 1st harm, heal (×2), magic missile; Cantrips (1st)
chill touch, detect magic, light, prestidigitation, read aura, shield
Cleric Domain Spells 1 Focus Point, DC 17; 1st cry of destruction (Core Rulebook 390)

PROPHET
The gods occasionally send messages in dreams to individuals who wander the
lands, gaining followers with their oratorical abilities. Some prophets have
not received true divine missives, but have misinterpreted normal dreams.

18834020

18834020

Religions inspire devout individuals to uphold their tenets. Many of these devotees
seek to bring respite and hope, but others have darker motives.

PROPHET
CN

MEDIUM

4121966

CREATURE 2
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +10
Languages Common
Skills Diplomacy +8, Performance +8 (+10 to spout prophecy),
Religion +7, Survival +7
Str +2, Dex +1, Con +0, Int +1, Wis +3, Cha +4
Items flail, manifesto (functions as religious text), pouch of
rocks, robes
AC 17; Fort +8, Ref +7, Will +11
HP 24
Speed 25 feet
Melee  flail +8 (disarm, sweep, trip), Damage 1d6+2
bludgeoning
Melee  fist +8 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d4+2 bludgeoning
Ranged  rock +7 (thrown 10 feet), Damage 1d4+2 bludgeoning
Divine Spontaneous Spells DC 18, attack +10; 1st (4 slots) bless,
heal, ray of enfeeblement, sanctuary; Cantrips (1st) daze, detect
magic, guidance, know direction, light, prestidigitation, read aura
Cleric Domain Spells 1 Focus Point, DC 18; 1st read fate
(Core Rulebook 395)

ACOLYTE

ZEALOT
Zealots ferret out plots against their religion and seek justice for their church’s
followers. This zealot serves Asmodeus, but others might serve Abadar, Calistria,
Iomedae, Norgorber, Pharasma, Sarenrae, or Zon-Kuthon. They often ride a war horse
(Bestiary 209) wearing light barding. This horse is an additional monster in the fight.

212

18834020

4121967

4121967

18834021

18834021


NPC Gallery

ZEALOT OF ASMODEUS	
NE

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 4

HUMANOID

Perception +9
Languages Common
Skills Athletics +9, Deception +10, Intimidation +10, Religion +10, Society +7
Str +4, Dex +1, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +3, Cha +2
Items composite shortbow (20 arrows), half plate, mace, steel shield (Hardness 5, HP 20,
BT 10)
AC 22 (24 with shield raised); Fort +9, Ref +7, Will +11
HP 58
Shield Block 
Swear Vengeance  Trigger A creature the zealot can see damages a follower of Asmodeus
other than the zealot; Effect The zealot gains the effect of a 1st-level true strike spell. If
the zealot makes an attack roll against anyone other than the triggering creature, the true
strike ends with no effect.
Speed 20 feet
Melee  mace +12 (shove), Damage 1d8+4 bludgeoning
Ranged  composite shortbow +9 (deadly 1d10, propulsive, range increment 60 feet,
reload 0), Damage 1d6+2 piercing
Divine Prepared Spells DC 19, attack +11; 2nd harm (×3), restoration, see invisibility, shield
other; 1st detect alignment, magic weapon, spirit link; Cantrips (2nd) detect magic,
divine lance, forbidding ward, read aura, sigil
Channel Smite [two-actions] (divine, necromancy) The zealot expends a prepared harm spell
and makes a melee Strike. Instead of the normal effect of the spell, its negative
damage is added to the Strike’s damage.
Deadly Simplicity The zealot’s mace deals 1d8 damage instead of 1d6.

5
introduction

SPELL SWAP EXAMPLE
To make a NE acolyte or priest of
Urgathoa, you can use these spells.
3rd bind undead, circle of protection,
harm (×3), vampiric touch; 2nd dispel
magic, false life, ghoulish cravings;
1st bane, fear, ray of enfeeblement;
Cantrips chill touch, detect magic,
divine lance, guidance, shield; Cleric
Domain Spell undeath’s blessing
(Core Rulebook 398)

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

PRIEST

4121967

Cloistered priests safeguard their temples and communities. They are the
stalwart keepers of their god’s tenets, devoted to spreading the word.
Their guidance or healing services come at the cost of a donation.

PRIEST OF PHARASMA
N

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 6

HUMANOID

Perception +14
Languages Common
Skills Diplomacy +12, Medicine +14, Religion +14, Society +11, Survival +12
Str +3, Dex +3, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +4, Cha +2
Items +1 dagger, religious symbol of Pharasma
AC 21; Fort +11, Ref +11, Will +14
HP 80
Speed 25 feet
Melee  dagger +13 (agile, magical, versatile S), Damage
1d6+5 piercing
Ranged  dagger +13 (agile, magical, thrown 10 feet,
versatile S), Damage 1d6+5 piercing
Divine Prepared Spells DC 24, attack +16; 3rd circle of protection,
heal (×3), searing light (×2); 2nd gentle repose, silence, spiritual weapon;
1st disrupting weapons, mindlink, spirit link; Cantrips (3rd) detect magic,
disrupt undead, light, read aura, shield
Cleric Domain Spells 1 Focus Point, DC 24; 3rd death’s call (Core Rulebook 391)
Divine Rituals DC 24; consecrate
Healing Hands When the priest casts heal, they roll d10s instead of d8s.
Steady Spellcasting If another creature’s reaction would disrupt the priest’s
spellcasting action, the priest attempts a DC 15 flat check. If the priest
succeeds, their action isn’t disrupted.

PRIEST

213

18834021

4121968

4121968


Gamemastery Guide

DOWNTRODDEN
BRAVING THE MOB
A mob is a violent crowd
(Core Rulebook 514) that works
as greater difficult terrain and
hazardous terrain, dealing 1d4
damage for each square entered. A
creature can spend a single action to
attempt a DC 16 Intimidation check,
clearing the mob from all squares
adjacent to them on a success
(or all squares within 10 feet on
a critical success). This action
has the concentrate, emotion,
manipulate, and mental traits.

BEGGAR
Wherever there is poverty, there are beggars. Beggars are truly the downtrodden of
society—folks who have been cast out into the streets due to a variety of setbacks
or the weight of circumstance. Some beggars work for underworld organizations
as lookouts, spies, or even hired muscle on the cheap—sometimes by choice, but
often not.

BEGGAR
N

MEDIUM

CREATURE –1
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +3
Languages Common
Skills Athletics +3, Deception +3, Diplomacy +3, Stealth +5, Underworld Lore +2
Str +1, Dex +3, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +1, Cha +1
AC 15; Fort +4, Ref +7, Will +3
HP 10
Speed 25 feet
Melee  fist +5 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d4+1 bludgeoning
Ranged  rock +5 (thrown 10 feet), Damage 1d4+1 bludgeoning
Beat a Retreat [two-actions] The beggar Strides three times and gains a +2 circumstance bonus
to AC during those actions.

18834022

18834022

Unfortunately, every society has people living on its fringes. While good communities
work to grant aid and respite to their downtrodden, sometimes—due to economic
downturn, famine, or war—the ranks of the less fortunate exceed the community’s
capacity to support them. In heartless neutral and evil societies, poverty is seen as
an inevitability that can never be truly eradicated, or even worse, as a tool to be
manipulated for political gain.

4121968

COMMONER
Though not every commoner is downtrodden, many live hard lives of toil as
they work to keep their families fed and housed in
relative comfort. While many commoners are just
simple folks who keep to themselves, sometimes
commoners rebel, either rising up to face their
oppressors or persuaded or even duped into
joining nefarious plans and criminal conspiracies.
Commoners benefit from power in numbers, and a
crowd of commoners can accomplish a great deal more than their rulers
often expect.

COMMONER
N

BEGGAR

MEDIUM

CREATURE –1
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +3
Languages Common
Skills Athletics +5, Lore (any one related to their trade) +6, Society +2
Str +3, Dex +1, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +1, Cha +0
Items sickle
AC 13; Fort +6, Ref +3, Will +3
HP 10
Speed 25 feet
Melee  sickle +5 (agile, trip), Damage 1d4+2 slashing
Ranged  rock +3 (thrown 10 feet), Damage 1d4+2 bludgeoning
Power of the Mob When three or more commoners are adjacent to each other,
each commoner gets a +1 circumstance bonus to Athletic checks to Shove,
attack rolls, and damage rolls.

214

18834022

4121969

4121969

18834023

18834023


NPC Gallery

URCHIN
Although their escapades might be notorious, few urchins are thrill-seekers. For some
urchins, when begging alone is not enough to fill their bellies, theft becomes a viable
survival tactic. Many underworld powers also use urchins as spies and messengers,
while training them to become future pickpockets, burglars, and foot soldiers.

URCHIN
N

SMALL

CREATURE –1
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +3
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +5, Deception +4, Society +3, Stealth +5, Survival +3, Thievery +7
Str –1, Dex +3, Con +0, Int +1, Wis +1, Cha +2
Items shiv
AC 15; Fort +2, Ref +7, Will +3
HP 8
Speed 25 feet
Melee  shiv +5 (agile), Damage 1d4–1 piercing
Melee  fist +5 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d4–1 bludgeoning
Ranged  rock +5 (thrown 10 feet), Damage 1d4–1 bludgeoning
Collaborative Thievery The urchin gains a +1 circumstance bonus to Steal or Palm an
Object while within 10 feet of an ally who has the pickpocket ability.
Pickpocket The urchin can Steal or Palm an Object that’s closely guarded without taking
the usual –5 penalty. They can Steal objects that would be extremely noticeable or
time-consuming to remove (like worn shoes, armor, or actively wielded objects).

5
introduction

WORD ON THE STREET
Privy to all sorts of conversations
from passersby, the downtrodden
can provide eyes and ears on
the street. Finding a reliable
contact can give a character a
circumstance bonus to checks to
Gather Information if they return to
that source. This bonus is usually
+1, but could be +2 or +3 if the
contact lingers in a market where
influential politicians shop, sweeps
a noble estate, or the like.
Befriending NPCs in advance
can also help the heroes in action
scenes. A friendly urchin might
show a character a shortcut to
catch an escaping enemy, a crowd
of fans who frequent a bard’s
performances might throw rocks to
distract someone trying to fight the
bard, and so on.

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

PRISONER
Most who end up in a jail, dungeon, or prison are just biding their time until their
imprisonment ends, trying to find ways to make it through interminable days of
boredom and deprivation. Some, however, may use their time on the inside to
strengthen their criminal connections. Using force and intimidation to gain status
among other prisoners, they create makeshift weapons to take down their enemies
and give them an edge if escape becomes possible. Even for prisoners who don’t
become involved in the world of prison politics, learning to stand up for themselves
and projecting an air of toughness can become essential for survival in a place
where people have little left to lose.

PRISONER
N

MEDIUM

4121969

CREATURE 1
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +6
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +7, Athletics +6, Intimidation +3, Stealth +7, Thievery +7
Str +3, Dex +4, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +1, Cha +0
Items shiv
AC 17; Fort +4, Ref +9, Will +6
HP 17
Speed 25 feet
Melee  shiv +7 (agile), Damage 1d4+3 piercing
Melee  fist +7 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d4+3 piercing
Sneak Attack The prisoner deals an extra 1d6 precision damage to flat-footed
creatures.
Surprise Attack On the first round of combat, creatures that haven’t acted
yet are flat-footed to the prisoner.
You’re Next  (emotion, fear, mental) Trigger The prisoner reduces a
creature to 0 Hit Points; Effect The prisoner attempts an Intimidation
check with a +2 circumstance bonus to Demoralize a single creature it
can see and that can see them.

URCHIN

215

18834023

4121970

4121970


Gamemastery Guide

EXPLORERS
TIPS FROM THE GUIDE
You might allow PCs who Follow
the Expert when led by a guide to
continue to add their level to the
skill check for some time afterward:
1 hour if the guide is an expert,
1 day for master, or 1 week for
legendary. (The guide here has
expert Athletics, Scouting Lore, and
Survival.) A character can have this
benefit for only one skill at a time.

TORCHBEARER
Torchbearers carry a light sources for seasoned explorers and serve as apprentices.

TORCHBEARER
N

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 0
HUMANOID

Perception +5
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +5, Architecture Lore +2, Athletics +4, Stealth +5, Survival +3
Str +2, Dex +3, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +1, Cha +1
Items climbing kit, dagger, hand crossbow (20 bolts), tindertwig (5), torch (4)
AC 15; Fort +5, Ref +7, Will +5
HP 15
Speed 25 feet
Melee  torch +7, Damage 1d6+2 bludgeoning plus 1 fire
Melee  dagger +5 (agile, versatile S), Damage 1d4+2 piercing
Ranged  hand crossbow +5 (range increment 60 feet, reload 1), Damage 1d6 piercing
Torch Combatant A torchbearer is adept at attacking with torches and deals 1 persistent fire
damage when they critically hit with a torch.

CHRONICLER
Exploration means very little if no account of the details exist. Members of
adventuring bands cherish chroniclers who record tales of their deeds.

CHRONICLER

18834024

18834024

The world is a wide, open place fraught with peril and adventure. Explorers use
their knowledge of nature and survival skills to see every corner of the land.

N

CHRONICLER

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 3

4121970

HUMANOID

Perception +14
Languages Common
Skills Map Lore +17, Nature +14, Scribing Lore +17, Society +12, Survival +14
Str +2, Dex +2, Con +1, Int +4, Wis +4, Cha +0
Items crossbow (20 bolts), dagger, journal, leather armor, maps, scroll of acid
arrow, scroll of heal, staff
AC 18; Fort +8, Ref +9, Will +9
HP 45
Live to Tell the Tale  Frequency once per day; Trigger The chronicler is dying;
Effect The chronicler reduces their dying condition by 1. If the chronicler is no longer
dying, they remain unconscious for at least 1 hour or until they regain 1 Hit Point.
Speed 25 feet
Melee  dagger +7 (agile, thrown 10 feet, versatile S), Damage 1d4+2
piercing
Melee  staff +7 (two-hand d8), Damage 1d4+2 bludgeoning
Ranged  crossbow +7 (range increment 120 feet, reload 1), Damage
1d8 piercing
Primal Prepared Spells DC 20, attack +12; 2nd entangle, flaming
sphere; 1st fleet step, longstrider, pass without trace; Cantrips
(2nd) know direction, light, ray of frost, sigil, tanglefoot
Scroll Mastery The chronicler can activate any scroll of a
2nd-level spell or lower as if they had the spell on their spell list,
regardless of its magical tradition.

GUIDE
Guides bring travelers, tourists, and adventurers into the wondrous
natural world, using their expertise to avoid deadly monsters and gruesome hazards.

216

18834024

4121971

4121971

18834025

18834025


NPC Gallery

GUIDE
N

MEDIUM

CREATURE 4
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +14
Languages Common
Skills Athletics +14, Scouting Lore +12, Survival +12, Stealth +11
Str +4, Dex +1, Con +2, Int +1, Wis +3, Cha +0
Items composite shortbow (40 arrows), greataxe, scale mail
AC 21; Fort +12, Ref +11, Will +14
HP 60
Guide’s Warning  Trigger The guide is about to roll a Perception or Survival check to
determine their initiative; Effect The guide visually or audibly warns allies, granting them
a +1 circumstance bonus to their initiative rolls. Depending on how the guide warns allies,
this action has the auditory or visual trait.
Speed 25 feet
Melee  greataxe +12 (sweep), Damage 1d12+6 slashing
Ranged  composite shortbow +9 (deadly 1d10, propulsive, range increment 60 feet,
reload 0), Damage 1d6+2 piercing
Guiding Words  The guide points out a weakness of a creature within 30 feet.
The guide and all allies that can hear or see the guide gain a +1 status bonus to
attack and damage rolls against that creature until the beginning of the guide’s
next turn. The guide adds an extra 1d6 precision damage to their weapon and
unarmed attacks that hit that creature
during the duration.

5
introduction

PATHFINDER CHRONICLES
The Pathfinder Society’s quarterly
compilation includes outlandish
tales like the following.
• A mount gleams of silver, its
inhabitants beings born of metal.
• A hedge maze extends to faraway
nations and distant worlds.
• In faraway chasms, the
haunted clockwork wails in a
thousand voices.

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

TOMB RAIDER
Great treasure awaits those willing to explore the
hazardous depths of the world’s ancient tombs and
forgotten dungeons. Some tomb raiders seek riches of
bygone eras; others recover pieces of history thought
lost to the sands of time.

TOMB RAIDER
N

MEDIUM

HUMAN

4121971

CREATURE 5
HUMANOID

Perception +13
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +13, Architecture Lore +11, Athletics
+13, Deception +7, Engineering Lore +11, Society +9,
Stealth +11, Thievery +13
Str +4, Dex +4, Con +1, Int +2, Wis +2, Cha +0
Items climbing kit, hand crossbow (20 bolts), +1 kukri
Hazard Spotter The tomb raider automatically attempts a
secret Perception check to notice a hazard when they are
within 10 feet of the hazard.
AC 21; Fort +10, Ref +15, Will +11
HP 75
Speed 25 feet, climb 15 feet
Melee  kukri +15 (agile, magical, trip), Damage 1d6+7 slashing
Ranged  hand crossbow +15 (range increment 60 feet,
reload 1), Damage 1d6+3 piercing
Trick Attack  The tomb raider musters their guile
to attempt a clever attack that catches their foe
unprepared. The tomb raider chooses one of their
weapons. The next attack with that weapon deals an
extra 2d6 precision damage. In addition, the tomb raider
can Interact to draw the weapon (or to reload it if they choose
the hand crossbow).

GUIDE

217

18834025

4121972

4121972


Gamemastery Guide

FORESTERS
PENALTIES FOR POACHING
Punishment for poaching on noble
land can be vicious. Maiming
poachers by removing fingers
is a common practice. Crueler
punishments include snaring
poachers in their own traps and
leaving them helpless, or binding
them in the bloody skins of their
catch and setting dogs to chase them
through the woods.

POACHER
Some forests are protected by kings, others only by wild things. Laws against
hunting may protect the private reserves of nobles or guard the viability of animal
populations of shared forests during specific seasons. Poachers violate those laws—
sometimes out of greed, sometimes out of desperation, and sometimes for sport.
Although penalties against poaching often include public shaming (see Penalties for
Poaching), in lean times a successful poacher is a local hero.

POACHER
NE

MEDIUM

CREATURE 2
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +9
Languages Common
Skills Crafting +4, Deception +4, Nature +7, Stealth +8, Survival +7
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +3, Cha +0
Items club, composite shortbow (20 arrows), padded armor, snare kit
Forager While using Survival to Subsist, if the hunter rolls a failure
or a critical failure, they get a success instead. If the hunter rolls
a success, they can provide food for 4 additional creatures that
eat about as much as a human, or 8 creatures on a critical
success.
Snare Crafting The poacher can use the Crafting skill to create
the following snares: alarm snare, hampering snare, marking
snare, and signaling snare. The poacher can create four snares
each day without paying for the materials, using 3 Interact
actions to set up each snare.
AC 19; Fort +7, Ref +10, Will +7
HP 30
Speed 25 feet
Melee  club +8, Damage 1d6+5 bludgeoning
Ranged  composite shortbow +10 (deadly 1d10, propulsive,
range increment 60 feet, reload 0), Damage 1d6+3 piercing
Hunt Prey  (concentrate) The poacher designates a single
creature they can see and hear, or one they’re Tracking, as their
prey. The poacher gains a +2 circumstance bonus to Perception
checks to Seek the prey and to Survival checks to Track the prey.
The first time the poacher hits the designated prey in a round, they deal an
additional 1d8 precision damage. The poacher also ignores the penalty for making
ranged attacks within their second range increment. These effects last until the
poacher uses Hunt Prey again.

18834026

18834026

From the managed and cultivated forests that support villages to the tree-covered
crown lands where only nobles and their servants are permitted to hunt, forests
provide. To communities, forests provide fuel, food, medicine, and raw materials,
while royally protected forests provide food for the nobles’ table and a source of
entertainment in the form of organized hunts. Even the ancient woods untouched
by mortal hand or blade provide bards with settings where legends happened and
could happen again. Many find the forest depths unsettling, but others live their
lives among the trees and alongside the creatures that make their homes there.

4121972

TRACKER
POACHER

The forest offers dangerous creatures—whether they walk on four legs or two—a
place to hide. Dim light, low brush, and fallen leaves conspire to hide their
trails. Given these poor conditions, an unskilled eye might spot a sign or two
of a creature’s passing, but only a skilled tracker can identify several such
signs and discern their relationship to each other, connecting one to the next

218

18834026

4121973

4121973


NPC Gallery

until they form a trail of prints, scat, fur, feathers, and blood that leads to the
quarry’s lair.

TRACKER
N

MEDIUM

CREATURE 3
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +13
Languages Common
Skills Forest Lore +5, Nature +11, Stealth +9, Survival +13
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +4, Cha +0
Items composite longbow (60 arrows), leather armor, staff
Forager As poacher, but the tracker feeds 16 additional creatures, or 32 on a critical
success.
Master Tracker The tracker can Track while moving at full speed.
AC 20; Fort +9, Ref +11, Will +9
HP 45
Speed 25 feet
Melee  staff +9 (two-hand d8), Damage 1d4+4 bludgeoning
Ranged  composite longbow +11 (deadly 1d10, propulsive, range increment 100 feet,
reload 0, volley 30 feet), Damage 1d8+3 piercing
Hunt Prey  (concentrate) As poacher (page 218).

HUNTER
As is reflected in the many depictions of an elk-headed Erastil,
god of the hunt, the hunter is very much a creature of the forest,
known by the forest and familiar with every aspect of it. After all,
the final determination of who is the hunter and who is prey often
depends on who is able to make an ally of the terrain.

5
introduction

FAMED FORESTS
The Verduran Forest is the largest
woodland on the continent of
Avistan; the druids and rangers of
the Wildwood Lodge earned the
forest great autonomy through
a thousand-year treaty. The
Forest of Spirits stretches over
a thousand miles of Tian Xia and
is the primeval birthplace of the
nature spirits known as kami.
The Fangwood in Nirmathas
and the Gravelands is home to a
secret village of druids, named
Crystalhurst, and to one of the
most powerful green dragons in
the world. The terrible Darkblight
devastated the 7,000-year-old
fey court that once guarded the
wood. The Fierani Forest covers
the majority of the elven nation of
Kyonin and borders Tanglebriar,
home to the Fierani rangers’ great
nemesis, the demon Treerazer.

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18834027

18834027

4121973

HUNTER
N

MEDIUM

CREATURE 7
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +17
Languages Common
Skills Forest Lore +13, Medicine +15, Nature +17, Stealth +17,
Survival +17
Str +4, Dex +4, Con +2, Int +1, Wis +4, Cha +0
Items +1 composite longbow, dagger, leather
armor, shortsword
Forager As poacher, but the hunter feeds 16 additional
creatures, or 32 on a critical success.
Forest Walker The hunter ignores the effects of difficult
terrain from a forest environment. They can Sneak
through underbrush without the need to attempt a Stealth
check as long as the hunter moves no more than 5 feet at a
time and is not within 10 feet of an enemy at any point during
their movement.
AC 25; Fort +15, Ref +17, Will +15
HP 115
Speed 25 feet
Melee  dagger +18 (agile, finesse, versatile S), Damage 1d4+9 piercing
Melee  shortsword +18 (agile, finesse, versatile S), Damage 1d6+9
piercing
Ranged  composite longbow +18 (deadly 1d10, magical,
propulsive, range increment 100 feet, reload 0, volley
30 feet), Damage 1d8+8 piercing
Hunt Prey  (concentrate) As poacher, but for 1d8
precision damage.

HUNTER

219

18834027

4121974

4121974


Gamemastery Guide

HEALERS
MEDICAL SERVICE PRICES
The physician and surgeon are
masters of Medicine; the apothecary
and plague doctor are experts.
Plague doctors charge five times
this rate, and surgeons 10 times.
Identify Affliction: 1 sp.
Treat Wounds: 2 sp.
Treat Disease: 1 gp.
First Aid or Treating a Poison: 1 sp.

APOTHECARY
Surrounded by bottles and bins of crushed herbs, curative minerals, and potent
extracts, the apothecary skillfully combines materials into unguents and medicines.
For encounters involving making medicine or alchemical contests, the apothecary
is a 3rd-level challenge.

APOTHECARY
N

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE –1
HUMANOID

Perception +5
Languages Common
Skills Crafting +5 (+8 for alchemy and medication), Medicine +10, Nature +8
Str +0, Dex +1, Con +1, Int +3, Wis +3, Cha +1
Items lesser acid flask (2), dagger, minor elixir of life (2), healer’s tools, leather
apron (functions as padded armor), mortar and pestle
Medical Wisdom The apothecary can identify the effect of any alchemical
composition or medical ingredient using only their senses. This typically takes 1
minute.
AC 14; Fort +8, Ref +3, Will +5; +1 circumstance to all saves vs. poisons
HP 9; Resistances poison 2
Speed 25 feet
Melee  stone pestle +4, Damage 1d6 bludgeoning
Melee  fist +5 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d4 bludgeoning
Ranged  acid flask +5 (range increment 20 feet, splash), Damage 1 acid plus
1d6 persistent acid and 1 splash acid

18834028

18834028

The world is a dangerous place. Thankfully, there are those who devote their lives
to easing the pain and suffering of others.

4121974

PHYSICIAN
The art of medicine is a blend of the intellectual and the practical, concerned
with how diseases work and how to prevent them. The physician can be found
consulting well-thumbed tomes while meticulously examining patients to better
understand their condition, before determining the most effective treatment. For
medical matters, the physician is a 4th-level challenge.

PHYSICIAN
N

PHYSICIAN

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE –1
HUMANOID

Perception +6 (+8 to notice ailments)
Languages Common
Skills Diplomacy +8, Medicine +12, Society +10
Str –1, Dex +1, Con +1, Int +4, Wis +2, Cha +2
Items minor elixirs of life (2), healer’s tools, medical textbook
Bedside Manner A physician has a +2 circumstance bonus to Diplomacy checks to Make
an Impression on or make a Request of a diseased, poisoned, or wounded creature.
Doctor’s Hand When the physician rolls a critical failure on a check to Treat Disease, Treat
Poison, or Treat Wounds, they get a failure instead.
AC 13; Fort +9, Ref +3, Will +8
HP 9
Speed 25 feet
Melee  fist +5 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d4–1 bludgeoning
Ranged  medical textbook +5 (nonlethal, thrown 10 feet), Damage 1d4–1 bludgeoning

SURGEON
The surgeon specializes in the physical alteration of the body to prevent the spread
of disease, removing necrotic and decaying flesh to help the whole to survive. Few

220

18834028

4121975

4121975

18834029

18834029


NPC Gallery

healers know the science of anatomy and physiology better than the surgeon.
While their expertise is of grave importance in the medical world, the downside
is that when one is in need of their talents, it is likely the complaint is serious. In
medical matters, a surgeon is a 6th-level challenge.

SURGEON
N

MEDIUM

CREATURE 2
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +14
Languages Common
Skills Crafting+10, Diplomacy+8, Medicine +16
Str +1, Dex +3, Con +1, Int +2, Wis +4, Cha +0
Items healer’s tools, scalpel (3)
Doctor’s Hand When the surgeon rolls a critical failure on a check to Treat Disease, Treat
Poison, or Treat Wounds, they get a failure instead.
AC 17; Fort +7, Ref +7, Will +10
HP 30
Speed 25 feet
Melee  scalpel +11 (agile, versatile P), Damage 1d4+1 slashing
Ranged  scalpel +11 (agile, thrown 10 feet, versatile P), Damage 1d4+1
slashing
Medical Malpractice  The surgeon attempts a Medicine check against the
Fortitude DC of one living creature they can see within 60 feet. On a
success, the surgeon’s melee Strikes deal an extra 1d6 precision damage
against that creature (2d6 on a critical success) until 1 minute passes or
the surgeon critically hits that creature, whichever comes first. Using
this action again designates a new target and ends the effect for any
previous target. A surgeon can target an individual creature no more
than once per day with this ability.

5
introduction

AILMENTS
Common diseases appear on page
118. These can be treated by most
healers, though they may have
longer-term physiological impacts.
For unusual conditions, like ghoul
fever or mummy rot, you might
impose penalties on a normal healer
attempting to remedy them.

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121975

PLAGUE DOCTOR
These healers, often seen wearing distinctive masks and burning powders to
defend against airborne plagues, are as much feared as they are respected. To see
a plague doctor signals that disease has infested the land—and that it might have
already taken hold. Despite their devoted work in curing the untouchable, they are
sometimes treated with suspicion, as if they are somehow the cause of the plague.

PLAGUE DOCTOR
N

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 5
HUMANOID

Perception +13
Languages Common
Skills Intimidation +9, Medicine +13, Plague Lore +13, Religion +13
Str +0, Dex +1, Con +4, Int +2, Wis +4, Cha +2
Items crossbow (10 bolts), healer’s tools, minor potion of healing (4), staff, studded leather
AC 20; Fort +13, Ref +8, Will +13
HP 73
Speed 25 feet
Melee  staff +9 (two-hand d8), Damage 1d4 bludgeoning
Ranged  crossbow +10 (range increment 120 feet, reload 1), Damage 1d8 piercing
Divine Prepared Spells DC 23; 3rd heal (×3), neutralize poison, remove disease; 2nd
death knell, remove fear, restoration; 1st detect poison, purify food and drink (×2);
Cantrips (3rd) guidance, light, message, sigil, stabilize
Cleric Domain Spells 1 Focus Point, DC 23; 3rd healer’s blessing (Core Rulebook 393)
Healing Hands When the plague doctor casts heal, they roll d10s instead of d8s.
Improved Communal Healing When the plague doctor casts heal targeting a
single creature, the plague doctor also restores Hit Points equal to the spell’s
level to themself or any other creature within range of the spell.

SURGEON

221

18834029

4121976

4121976


Gamemastery Guide

LABORERS
LABORER GAMES
Laborers tend to play games when
the work is slow or while on break.
Common games include Gremlin
Row, which involves rolling dice and
trying to match them, as well as
Fishing with Fire, in which players
try to get all the cards of one type
from a deck without losing all of their
own cards and getting “burned.”

Every day, laborers perform backbreaking physical work.

SERVANT
Maids, butlers, and majordomos alike, servants are skilled at keeping a home in
working order and protecting the interests of their employers.

SERVANT
N

MEDIUM

CREATURE –1
HUMAN

Perception +9
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +5, Diplomacy +4, Household Lore +4, Society +2
Str +1, Dex +3, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +1, Cha +2
Items cutlery (10), servant’s uniform, serving platter (Hardness 3, HP 6, BT 3)
AC 15 (16 with platter raised); Fort +5, Ref +7, Will +3
HP 9
Raise a Shield  The serving platter has the same statistics as a buckler, but requires
a hand to hold.
Speed 25 feet
Melee  cutlery +5 (agile, versatile S), Damage 1d4+1 piercing
Ranged  cutlery +5 (agile, thrown 15 feet, versatile S), Damage 1d4+1 piercing

DOCKHAND
Working to load and unload cargo from ships, dockhands are considered
unruly, but many stay focused and work hard until the job is done. Some
do celebrate the end of their work day with rowdy drinking.

DOCKHAND

18834030

18834030

HUMANOID

N

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 0

4121976

HUMANOID

Perception +3
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +3, Athletics +5, Intimidation +3, Labor Lore +4
Str +3, Dex +1, Con +3, Int +0, Wis +1, Cha +1
Items empty bottle (3), leather armor, whiskey (1 bottle)
AC 14; Fort +7, Ref +5, Will +3
HP 20
Speed 25 feet
Melee  fist +7 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d4+3 bludgeoning
Ranged  bottle +5 (agile, thrown 20 feet), Damage 1d6+3 bludgeoning
Heft Crate  (manipulate) Requirements The dockhand is adjacent to a crate; Effect
The dockhand picks up a crate and heaves it up to 15 feet. Upon landing, the crate
breaks open in a 5-foot burst. Each creature within the area takes 2d6 bludgeoning
damage (DC 13 basic Reflex save), and the area becomes difficult terrain until cleared.
Swig  (manipulate) The dockhand Interacts to either draw a bottle of alcohol
or pick up a nearby unattended bottle of alcohol and drink the whole thing. For
1 minute, the dockhand gains a +2 item bonus to melee damage rolls and saving
throws against fear, but they become clumsy 1.

FARMER
Workers of the fields, vineyards, and orchards of the world, farmers are
known for their rugged endurance and their skill with both plants and animals.

SERVANT

FARMER
N

MEDIUM

CREATURE 0
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +6
Languages Common

222

18834030

4121977

4121977

18834031

18834031


NPC Gallery

Skills Athletics +5, Farming Lore +4, Nature +4, Survival +4
Str +3, Dex +1, Con +3, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +0
Items apple (4), leather armor, pitchfork
AC 14; Fort +7, Ref +5, Will +4
HP 20
Speed 25 feet
Melee  pitchfork +6 (reach 10 feet), Damage 1d6+3 piercing
Ranged  apple +5 (agile, nonlethal, thrown 20 feet), Damage 1d4+3 bludgeoning
Pitch Bale  Requirements The farmer’s last action was a successful pitchfork Strike;
Effect The farmer moves the creature they hit with their pitchfork up to 5 feet, and the
target falls prone. The target can attempt a DC 13 Reflex save to avoid falling prone, and
avoids being moved altogether on a critical success.

5
introduction

FORCED LABOR
Many creatures and societies still
practice forced labor, whether
through full enslavement or
indebted labor to pay a society for
their crimes. The dockhand, farmer,
miner, and servant could also be
forced laborers. Forced laborers
could become allies or at least
informants to PCs who free them.

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules

MINER
Miners explore deep underground in search of minerals and rare
materials, taking numerous precautions to keep themselves safe.

NPC Gallery

MINER

GLOSSARY
and INDEX

N

MEDIUM

CREATURE 0
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +6
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +3, Athletics +6, Mining Lore +4, Survival +4
Str +2, Dex +1, Con +3, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +0
Items hammer, lantern, miner’s harness (functions as leather armor), pick, piton (5)
AC 14; Fort +7, Ref +5, Will +4
HP 20
Speed 25 feet
Melee  pick +6 (fatal 1d10), Damage 1d6+2 piercing
Piton Pin  (attack) Requirements The miner has their hammer in hand; Effect The miner
Interacts to draw a piton, then hammers it into a creature to pin them in place, attempting
an Athletics check against the target’s Reflex DC. On a hit, the target is immobilized until
it removes the piton with a successful DC 10 Athletics check made as an Interact action.

4121977

GRAVEDIGGER
An often-overlooked group of laborers, gravediggers have a reputation for being
as quiet and grim as their workplace. They are commonly strong and tough
from their long hours of backbreaking labor, and they tend to have a unique
perspective on life and death.

GRAVEDIGGER
N

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 1
HUMANOID

Perception +6
Languages Common
Skills Athletics +7, Graveyard Lore +4, Religion +4, Stealth +4
Str +4, Dex +1, Con +3, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +0
Items bull’s-eye lantern (2 oils), gravedigger’s garb (functions as leather armor), religious
symbol of Pharasma, shovel
AC 15; Fort +8, Ref +4, Will +7
HP 22; Resistances negative 2
Speed 25 feet
Melee  shovel +9, Damage 1d4+4 bludgeoning
Light in the Dark  (concentrate, divine, manipulate) Requirements The gravedigger
holds a bull’s-eye lantern in one hand and their religious symbol in the other, and the
lantern contains oil; Effect The gravedigger recites a brief chant to ignite their lantern
with positive energy. Each undead creature in a 15-foot line takes 3d6 positive damage
(DC 14 basic Fortitude save). This action uses all remaining oil in the bull’s-eye lantern.

DOCKHAND

223

18834031

4121978

4121978


Gamemastery Guide

MAGISTRATES
DELAYING TACTICS
A magistrate can weaponize
the bureaucracy. A judge might
enforce an archaic law generally
ignored yet still on the books. A
tax collector could ask for the seal
of a lord who is out of the region.
The harbormaster could require all
fees in local coin, fully aware money
changers won’t be open for days.

Magistrates are the cogs and gears that keep bureaucracy running, moving the
machine along under the inertia of the status quo.

JUDGE
These magistrates have the final say on the intent and spirit of the law. Properly
exercised, the duty of a judge is the strict adherence to the law regardless of station,
with minimal sentimentality toward rationalization and justification of why the
law was broken. Yet expectations and practice are not always the same thing. For
every unbiased justice, there is one who is zealously confident in their own agenda.
In a court case or other legal proceeding, the judge is a 6th-level challenge.

JUDGE
LN

CREATURE –1

MEDIUM

HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +8 (+15 to Sense Motive)
Languages Common
Skills Deception +8, Diplomacy +12, Intimidation +12, Legal Lore +16, Society +14
Str +0, Dex –1, Con +1, Int +4, Wis +4, Cha +2
Items books (law and rhetoric; worth 3 gp), gavel, judge’s robes
Group Impression When the judge Makes an Impression, they can compare their
Diplomacy check result to the Will DCs of up to four targets instead of one.
AC 13; Fort +5, Ref +1, Will +14
HP 9
Speed 25 feet
Melee  gavel +4, Damage 1d4 bludgeoning
Melee  fist +4 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d4 bludgeoning
Ranged  gavel +3 (thrown 10 feet), Damage 1d4 bludgeoning
18834032

18834032

4121978

TAX COLLECTOR
Ledgers and marks, positive and negative flows, and levies and
allotments are a tax collector’s daily bread. Where coin is gained, from
whom it is collected, and to whom is it disbursed are their main concerns;
the collector is unconcerned with whether the taxed can afford it or take a
loan to make up for any shortfall. However, tax collectors aren’t immune to
corruption: arrangements can be made, deals discussed, documents altered,
or coin misappropriated. When dealing with matters of taxes and finance,
the tax collector is a 3rd-level challenge.

TAX COLLECTOR
LN

TAX COLLECTOR

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE –1
HUMANOID

Perception +6 (DC 19 against Stealing)
Languages Common
Skills Deception +8, Diplomacy +8, Intimidation +8, Legal Lore +11, Mercantile Lore +13,
Society +11, Thievery +6
Str +0, Dex +1, Con +0, Int +4, Wis +2, Cha +3
Items crossbow (10 bolts), dagger, collection of expired documents with intact seals,
merchant’s scale, padded armor, tax documents in scroll case
AC 14; Fort +2, Ref +3, Will +9
HP 8
Speed 25 feet
Melee  dagger +5 (agile, versatile S) Damage 1d4 piercing
Ranged  crossbow +5 (range increment 120 feet, reload 1), Damage 1d8 piercing
Glittering Distraction  (emotion, mental) The tax collector Strides. At any point
during this movement, they can Interact to hurl coins. If there are commoners about,
this typically causes a scene. Crowds are usually difficult terrain and have other effects
(Core Rulebook 514).

224

18834032

4121979

4121979

18834033

18834033


NPC Gallery

HARBORMASTER
There are three flows important to any port: the seaward and coastal flows,
marked by the rise and fall of the tides, and the flow of trade. A harbormaster
is expected to know the former two reflexively and encourage the latter while
knowing jurisdictional rules of law. Often old hands of the sea, harbormasters find
themselves anchored to a port by commitment, conflict, or reputation.

HARBORMASTER
LN

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 3
HUMANOID

Perception +6
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +9, Athletics +9, Diplomacy +5, Fishing Lore +8, Intimidation +5, Sailing
Lore +10
Str +4, Dex +2, Con +2, Int +2, Wis +1, Cha +0
Items fishing tackle, hatchet (2), ledger, manacles, spyglass
Steady Balance Whenever the harbormaster rolls a success on a check to Balance,
they get a critical success instead. They’re not flat-footed while Balancing on narrow
surfaces and uneven ground. They can attempt an Acrobatics check instead of a Reflex
save to Grab an Edge.
AC 17; Fort +8, Ref +9, Will +8
HP 46
Speed 25 feet
Melee  hatchet +13 (agile, sweep), Damage 1d6+7 slashing
Ranged  hatchet +11 (agile, sweep, thrown 10 feet), Damage
1d6+7 slashing
Experienced Hand The harbormaster has endured their share of adverse
conditions at sea. Any creature that’s in adverse weather or aboard a vessel
on rough water is flat-footed to the harbormaster.

5
introduction

AT YOUR SERVICE
Magistrates can conscript others into
service in a variety of positions.
Harbormaster: Bosun (page 243),
dockhand (page 222), guard (page
232), ship captain (page 243).
Judge: Captain of the guard (page
234), executioner (page 235), guard
(page 232), jailer (page 233)
Tax Collector: Captain of the guard
(page 234), guard (page 232), jailer
(page 233), watch officer (page 234)

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121979

WARDEN
Wardens are the chief guardians of borders and frontiers. Whether they stand watch
over a single village or an entire region, wardens keep a vigilant eye out for outside
threats to their charges. Wardens are stalwart folk, often called to duty by Erastil to
protect those around them. Be it times of war or upon the frontier, wardens are often
the balanced edge of a blade between a community and the wilds at its fringes.

WARDEN
LN

MEDIUM

CREATURE 6
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +12
Languages Common
Skills Athletics +14, Nature +10, Stealth +12, Survival +12
Str +4, Dex +2, Con +3, Int +1, Wis +2, Cha +1
Items bastard sword, backpack, bedroll, compass, +1 composite longbow (10 arrows), flint
and steel, maps, pup tent, scale mail
AC 25; Fort +12, Ref +12, Will +12
HP 96
Warding Strike  Trigger One of the warden’s enemies within 100 feet attacks one
of the warden’s allies or a person the warden is sworn to protect; Effect The warden
Strikes the triggering enemy. If the Strike hits, the enemy’s attack is deflected, reducing
its damage by 8, or by 16 if the warden’s Strike was a critical hit.
Speed 25 feet
Melee  bastard sword +16 (two-hand d12), Damage 1d8+7 slashing
Ranged  composite longbow +17 (deadly 1d10, magical, propulsive, range increment 100
feet, reload 0, volley 30 feet), Damage 1d8+5 piercing
Warden’s Protection A warden deals an extra 1d8 damage to any creature trespassing on
the territory the warden protects.

HARBORMASTER

225

18834033

4121980

4121980


Gamemastery Guide

MERCENARIES
BRIBING MERCENARIES
Unless a mercenary prides themself
on their name or reputation, the
PCs might be able to bribe them to
switch sides, or at least stand aside.
You can estimate a bribe by taking
roughly 5% of the Party Currency
value from the row corresponding
to the NPC’s level on Table 10–9 on
page 509 of the Core Rulebook.

A broad category that includes those wielding arms, spells, or even guile and
cunning, mercenaries hire themselves and their expertise to those with the gold
to pay for it.

BODYGUARD
Hired to protect someone famous or powerful, bodyguards use intimidation,
quick wits, and martial skill to keep their charges safe. Such mercenaries might
be auxiliaries to a noble’s own guards, but with special directives to safeguard
their patrons.

BODYGUARD
N

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 1
HUMANOID

Perception +8
Languages Common
Skills Athletics +7, Intimidation +6, Society +2
Str +4, Dex +2, Con +3, Int –1, Wis +1, Cha +0
Items greatclub, sap, studded leather
AC 16; Fort +8, Ref +7, Will +4
HP 25
Speed 25 feet
Melee  greatclub +7 (backswing, shove), Damage 1d10+4 bludgeoning
Melee  sap +7 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d6+4 bludgeoning
Bodyguard’s Defense  The bodyguard selects one creature they can see
and hear within 30 feet. That creature gains a +2 circumstance bonus to AC
as long as the bodyguard is adjacent to the chosen creature and can act; this
bonus lasts until the start of the bodyguard’s next turn.
18834034

18834034

4121980

MAGE FOR HIRE
Not all mercenaries sell brawn and intimidating glares. Some sell their
magical talents to earn a living. While there are many types of mages for
hire, some of the sneakiest are specialized in divination, using their skills
for infiltration and sabotage.

MAGE FOR HIRE
N

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 3
HUMANOID

Perception +7
Languages Common
Skills Arcana +11, Society +9, Stealth +7, Thievery +9
Str +0, Dex +2, Con +1, Int +4, Wis +1, Cha +1
Items invisibility potion, spellbook, staff, thieves’ tools
AC 17; Fort +8, Ref +9, Will +10
HP 31
Speed 25 feet
Melee  staff +7 (two-hand d8), Damage 1d4 bludgeoning
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 20, attack +12; 2nd flaming sphere, knock, see
invisibility; 1st grease, mage armor, magic missile, true strike; Cantrips (2nd)
dancing lights, daze, detect magic, electric arc, mage hand, message, shield
Wizard School Spell 1 Focus Point, DC 20; 2nd diviner’s sight (Core Rulebook 406)

BOUNTY HUNTER
MAGE FOR HIRE

Bounty hunters are constantly on the move, whether within city walls or
the wilderness, trailing their fugitive quarries for capture… or disposal. Often
relying on stealth or deception as much as martial skill, bounty hunters employ
a vast array of talents to accomplish their goals, not to mention to collect
the hefty payout that follows.

226

18834034

4121981

4121981

18834035

18834035


NPC Gallery

BOUNTY HUNTER
N

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 4
HUMANOID

Perception +14
Languages Common
Skills Athletics +9, Deception +10, Diplomacy +8, Intimidation +8, Stealth +12, Survival +10
Str +3 Dex, +4, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +4, Cha +1
Items crossbow (10 bolts), falchion, simple manacles, studded leather
AC 21; Fort +9, Ref +12, Will +12
HP 60
Speed 25 feet
Melee  falchion +13 (forceful, sweep), Damage 1d10+6 slashing
Ranged  crossbow +14 (range increment 120 feet, reload 1), Damage 1d10+5 piercing
Hunt Prey  (concentrate) The bounty hunter designates a single creature they can
see and hear, or one they’re Tracking, as their prey. The bounty hunter gains a +2
circumstance bonus to Perception checks to Seek the prey and to Survival checks to
Track the prey. This effect lasts until the bounty hunter uses Hunt Prey again.
Running Reload  The bounty hunter Stride, Steps, or Sneaks, and then Interacts to
reload.
Precision Edge The first time the bounty hunter hits their hunted prey in a round, they
deal an additional 1d8 precision damage.

MONSTER HUNTER

5
introduction

MERCENARY BANTER
Here’s some parlance commonly
used by mercenaries.
Crackster: Someone adept at
breaking locks or safes.
Diving: Theft or smuggling below
ground, often through tunnels.
Foxing: To play at being asleep,
usually for an ambush.
Medic: A healer.
Ram: A hard-hitting warrior.
Slinger: A spellcaster.
Sway of Coin: Swearing allegiance to
whoever pays the most.
Waterline: A mercenary troupe’s
money: “Take time in town while
the waterline’s high, everyone.”
Whisperstep: Anyone who can
move stealthily.

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

Some mercenaries eschew the complications of politics, oaths of service, and
fealty and just get paid to hunt monsters. It’s a straightforward form of mercenary
service, often dangerous in the extreme, but one that can yield glory and fame.

MONSTER HUNTER
N

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 6

4121981

HUMANOID

Perception +13
Languages Common
Skills Athletics +15, Monster Lore +13, Stealth +13, Survival +11
Str +4, Dex +3, Con +3, Int +1, Wis +1, Cha +1
Items composite longbow (20 arrows), +1 greataxe, hide armor
AC 23; Fort +15, Ref +11, Will +13
HP 108
Attack of Opportunity 
Speed 20 feet
Melee  greataxe +15 (magical, sweep), Damage
1d12+8 slashing
Ranged  composite longbow +14 (deadly d10, propulsive,
range increment 100 feet, reload 0, volley 30 feet), Damage
1d8+6 piercing
Rage  (concentrate, emotion, mental) Requirements The
monster hunter isn’t fatigued or raging; Effect The monster
hunter gains 9 temporary Hit Points that last until the rage
ends. While raging, they deal 8 additional damage with
melee attacks, gain a +10-foot status bonus to their
Speed, and take a –1 penalty to AC. The monster hunter
can’t use concentrate actions except Seek and rage
actions. The rage lasts for 1 minute, until there are
no enemies the monster hunter can perceive, or
until the monster hunter falls unconscious. Once
the rage ends, the monster hunter can’t Rage
again for 1 minute.
Sudden Charge [two-actions] The monster hunter
Strides twice and makes a melee Strike.

BOUNTY HUNTER

227

18834035

4121982

4121982


Gamemastery Guide

MYSTICS
MYSTIC CADRES
Golarion has several mystic groups.
The Church of Razmir offers a plan
of 31 steps to divinity. The Esoteric
Order of the Palatine Eye seeks
celestial truths said to be granted
by an ancient angel. Knights of the
Aeon Star search for secret lore.
Followers of Rivethun, dwarven
animism, reach out to spirits to gain
knowledge and earn favors.

ADEPT
Adepts have unlocked only the most minor occult mysteries of the universe. A few
are chosen by accomplished practitioners for further training. Others volunteer to
join a cabal by passing an initiation ritual.

ADEPT 
N

MEDIUM

CREATURE –1
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +4
Languages Common
Skills Arcana +5, Diplomacy +3, Occultism +7, Scribing Lore +5, Society +5
Str +0, Dex +2, Con +0, Int +3, Wis +2, Cha +1
Items journal, robes, scroll case, writing set
Focused Thinker  (concentrate) The adept focuses inward to muster knowledge and
wisdom. While in this state of concentration, they gain a +2 status bonus to checks to
Recall Knowledge, but take a –2 penalty to Perception. They can end their focused state
with a single action, which has the concentrate trait.
AC 14; Fort +2, Ref +4, Will +6
HP 8
Speed 25 feet
Melee  fist +6 (agile, nonlethal); Damage 1d4 bludgeoning
Ranged  journal +6 (nonlethal, thrown 10 feet); Damage 1d6 bludgeoning
Occult Spells Known DC 14; Cantrips (1st) daze, detect magic, mage hand

18834036

18834036

Those initiated into the hidden truths and forbidden secrets of the world are forever
transformed—or so they claim. To the cynical, a mystic is nothing more than a
charlatan or zealot. Others profess to sense an aura around such luminaries and
treat them with reverence, lest they offend some harbinger of unspeakable doom.

4121982

HARROW READER
A harrow deck is a set of 54 cards with symbolic illustrations that serves as a
sacred divining tool. Feared by the superstitious and avoided by those who know
better than to tempt fate, harrow readers live and work in traveling communities,
often moving from town to town as opportunities arise. For encounters involving
social interaction, the harrow reader is a 3rd-level challenge.

HARROW READER 
N

ADEPT

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE –1

HUMANOID

Perception +7
Languages Common
Skills Diplomacy +8, Fortune-Telling Lore +11, Occultism +7, Performance +10 (+11 when
fortune-telling), Society +7
Str +1, Dex +2, Con +1, Int +2, Wis +3, Cha +3
Items harrow deck, sickle
AC 13; Fort +3, Ref +6, Will +10
HP 9
Speed 25 feet
Melee  sickle +7 (agile, finesse, trip), Damage 1d4+1 slashing
Fated Doom While harrow readers try to avoid combat, no throw of the cards can
avoid fate, so a harrow reader learns how to best survive. In the harrow reader’s
first encounter each day, they gain a +1 status bonus to their initiative roll, their
attack rolls, and their AC.

CULTIST
Excessively zealous, a cultist finds exalted purpose in their sect. Never questioning
their leader, they devote themselves to achieving their most perfect spiritual form.

228

18834036

4121983

4121983

18834037

18834037


NPC Gallery

CULTIST
N

MEDIUM

CREATURE 1
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +4
Languages Common
Skills Deception +3, Intimidation +3, Cult Lore (applies to the cultist’s own cult) +8,
Occultism +3, Society +4, Stealth +6
Str +4, Dex +3, Con +2, Int +1, Wis –1, Cha +0
Items dagger, cultist garb (functions as leather armor)
AC 17; Fort +7, Ref +8, Will +4 (or +2 vs. higher-ranking members of the cult)
HP 20
Speed 25 feet
Melee  dagger +7 (agile, versatile S), Damage 1d4+4 piercing
Ranged  dagger +6 (agile, thrown 10 feet, versatile S), Damage 1d4+4 piercing
Fanatical Frenzy  Requirements The cultist has taken damage and is neither fatigued nor
already in a frenzy; Effect The cultist flies into a frenzy that lasts 1 minute. While frenzied,
the cultist gains a +1 status bonus to attack rolls and a +2 status bonus to damage rolls,
and they take a –2 status penalty to AC. The cultist can’t voluntarily stop their frenzy.
After their frenzy, the cultist is fatigued.

5
introduction

MYSTIC RITUALS
The following are rituals sometimes
cast by mystic groups. Those from
the Bestiary are available only to
appropriate celestials and fiends
within the organizations.
• Abyssal pact (Bestiary 347)
• angelic messenger (Bestiary 348)
• call spirit (Core Rulebook 410)
• commune (Core Rulebook 410)
• Infernal pact (Bestiary 348)
• legend lore (Core Rulebook 413)
• planar ally (Core Rulebook 413)
• planar binding (Core Rulebook 414)

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

FALSE PRIEST
Belief is perhaps the strongest force in the universe, driving many to
great heights. Instilling a sense of belief and then using that belief against
someone, however, is the discipline of a false priest. Combining their gifts
of deception, a silver tongue, and an impeccable sense of timing, the false
priest can gain influence among the powerful, entice a mark to dispose of
all their possessions, and make a believer out of a cynic.

FALSE PRIEST
N

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 4

4121983

HUMANOID

Perception +10
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +10, Athletics +8, Deception +12, Performance +12, Religion +8,
Society +6
Str +0, Dex +4, Con +3, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +4
Items alchemical tools (used as “blessed items” to fool marks), backpack, cloak, hand
crossbow (20 bolts), collection of fake relics, wooden religious symbol, studded
leather armor, rapier
AC 21; Fort +11, Ref +12, Will +10
HP 51
Speed 25 feet
Melee  rapier +12 (deadly 1d8, disarm, finesse), Damage 1d6+8 piercing
Ranged  hand crossbow +12 (range increment 60 feet, reload 1), Damage 1d6+4
piercing
Deceiver’s Surprise On the first round of combat, if the false priest rolls Deception
or Performance for initiative, creatures that haven’t acted yet are flat-footed to
the false priest.
Fickle Prophecy  (emotion, mental) The false priest convinces someone of their
omnipotence by attempting a Deception check compared to the creature’s Will
DC. If successful, the target gains 1d8+4 temporary Hit Points that last for 1
hour or until the false priest removes them by rebuking the target, whichever
occurs first.
Sneak Attack The false priest deals an extra 1d6 precision damage to flat‑footed
creatures. This increases to 2d6 against creatures flat-footed due to the
false priest’s Feint or deceiver’s surprise.
The Jig Is Up  Frequency once per hour; Trigger The false priest critically fails a
Deception or Performance check; Effect The false priest Strides.

CULTIST

229

18834037

4121984

4121984


Gamemastery Guide

NECROMANCER
FORMS OF FORTUNE-TELLING
Anthomancy: Flowers.
Astrology: The cosmic caravan.
Demonomancy: Asking demons.
Harrowing: Harrow card readings.
Haruspicy: Entrails.
Ichthyomancy: The next fish caught.
Mazomancy: A nursing babe.
Oneiromancy: Dreams.
Tyromancy: Coagulation of cheese.

18834038

18834038

Defiling the natural order and spitting in the face of convention, the necromancer
remains dutifully committed to understanding what forces await beyond the
mortal boundaries of life and death.

NECROMANCER
NE

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 5
HUMANOID

Perception +10
Languages Common
Skills Arcana +13, Crafting +11, Intimidation +8, Religion +10
Str +2, Dex +3, Con +2, Int +4, Wis +3, Cha –1
Items light mace, hooded robe, scroll of spectral hand, spellbook (Abominable Missives
of the Atrophied)
Stench of Decay (arcane, aura, conjuration, poison) The necromancer emits a scent of
putrid rot in a 5-foot emanation. A creature that enters or begins its turn in the aura is
sickened 1.
AC 20; Fort +9, Ref +12, Will +12
HP 58
Speed 25 feet
Melee  light mace +12 (agile, finesse, shove), Damage 1d4+4
bludgeoning
Wizard Prepared Spells DC 21, attack +13; 3rd bind undead, lightning
bolt, vampiric touch; 2nd false life, grim tendrils, mirror image, web;
1st fear, feather fall, ray of enfeeblement, spider sting; Cantrips (3rd)
chill touch, detect magic, electric arc, ray of frost, read aura, shield
Wizard School Spells 1 Focus Point, DC 21; 3rd call of the grave (Core
Rulebook 406)
Drain Bonded Item  (arcane) Frequency once per day; Requirements The
necromancer hasn’t acted yet on this turn; Effect The necromancer expends
the power stored in their mace. This gives them the ability to cast one prepared
spell they prepared today and already cast, without spending a spell slot.

4121984

CULT LEADER
A career of mystical accomplishments combined with a lifetime of subterfuge
and intimidation has elevated this occultist to a powerful position.

CULT LEADER
N

CULT LEADER

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 7
HUMANOID

Perception +14
Languages Common
Skills Arcana +13, Deception +16, Diplomacy +14, Intimidation +16, Cult Lore
(applies to the leader’s own cult) +19, Occultism +17, Society +13
Str +0, Dex +4, Con +1, Int +4, Wis +3, Cha +5
Items indecipherable book of sigils, ceremonial robes, +1 staff
AC 23; Fort +12, Ref +15, Will +18
HP 95
Protect the Master!  (auditory, concentrate, emotion, linguistic, mental,
move) Trigger The cult leader is targeted with an attack, and a lower-ranking
cultist is adjacent to them; Effect The cult leader orders their cultist to leap
in front of the attack. The cultist and cult leader swap places, and the cultist
becomes the target of the attack. If the cultist has Fanatical Frenzy or a
similar ability, they can activate it as a reaction if they take damage from
the triggering attack.
Speed 25 feet
Melee  staff +13 (magical, two-hand d8), Damage 1d4+6 bludgeoning
Occult Spontaneous Spells DC 26, attack +18; 4th (3 slots) dimension

230

18834038

4121985

4121985

18834039

18834039


NPC Gallery

door, glibness, outcast’s curse, suggestion; 3rd (4 slots) enthrall, grim tendrils, haste, mind
reading; 2nd (4 slots) augury, calm emotions, hideous laughter, touch of idiocy; 1st (4 slots)
bless, illusory disguise, lock, unseen servant; Cantrips (4th) chill touch, daze, detect magic,
guidance, shield
Gather Converts [three-actions] (auditory, concentrate, emotion, linguistic, mental) With a short
emotional phrase, the cult leader tries to sway the public to do their bidding. The cult leader
tries to convince up to four bystanders in a crowd to either cause a commotion, turn against
a person or group, leave the area, protect the cult leader, or calm down. The cult leader
attempts a single Deception check against the highest Perception DC among the targets.
Critical Success The targets believe the lie and act as directed for 1 minute. Additionally,
one bystander remains by the cult leader’s side, influenced enough to join their sect.
All other targets become wise to the cult leader after 1 minute, at which point their
attitude toward the leader worsens by one step.
Success As a critical success, but no bystander joins the sect permanently.
Critical Failure The crowd is unmoved and unamused, and their attitude toward the cult
leader worsens by one step.

introduction

DARK RITUALS
Most rituals have a simple gp cost
and skills. But what if a desperate
NPC is willing to offer something
darker, such as lives, souls, or
worse? Such a nefarious ritual uses
a normal ritual as a baseline,
but the DCs and proficiency
requirements might be
reduced or waived entirely, as
might any gp cost.

MEDIUM

HUMAN

Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules

GLOSSARY
and INDEX

Demonologists can pull a creature from the Abyss and bend it to their will… for a time.

CE

Gamemastery
Basics

NPC Gallery

DEMONOLOGIST
DEMONOLOGIST

5

CREATURE 7
HUMANOID

Perception +15
Languages Abyssal, Common
Skills Academia Lore +14, Arcana +16, Demon Lore +18, Diplomacy +11
(+13 with demons), Religion +15
Str +3, Dex +1, Con +2, Int +4, Wis +4, Cha +0
Items +1 longspear, scholarly robes, spell component pouch, spellbook
(Fiendish Hypotheses and Protections from Same)
Abyssal Temptation (divine, enchantment, mental) Demonic study has garnered
the attention of at least one demon that is actively trying to possess the
demonologist. When the demonologist publicly espouses the benefits of demonic
power (whether they believe it a good thing or not), they gain a +1 status bonus to
skill checks, AC, and saves for 1 day. These bonuses don’t apply against demons.
At the end of the day, the demonologist must attempt a DC 20 Will save,
becoming possessed for 1 day on a failure (permanently on a critical failure).
AC 22; Fort +13, Ref +12, Will +15
HP 100
Speed 25 feet
Melee  longspear +17 (magical, reach), Damage 1d8+9 piercing
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 26, attack +18; 4th clairvoyance, lightning
bolt, resilient sphere; 3rd fireball, glyph of warding, slow, stinking
cloud; 2nd acid arrow, blur, hideous laughter, see invisibility; 1st fear
(×2), fleet step, mending; Cantrips (4th) acid splash, daze, detect
magic, light, read aura
Breach the Abyss  Requirements The demonologist’s last action
was to cast a non-cantrip spell; Effect The demonologist siphons
energy drawn from the Abyss into their weapon. Until the end of the turn,
the weapon deals an extra 2d6 damage. Roll 1d20 to determine the type:
1–7 acid, 8–9 cold, 10–11 electricity, 12–18 fire, 19–20 negative.
Demon Summoning The demonologist can cast a 5th-level summon fiend
arcane spell to summon a demon. To do so, they must sacrifice two
4th‑level prepared spells and voluntarily take 4d12 mental damage that
can’t be reduced or prevented. If the demonologist is unable to Sustain the Spell,
including if they’re knocked out or killed, the spell continues, but the GM rolls
a DC 10 flat check each round, ending the spell on a failure.

4121985

DEMONOLOGIST

231

18834039

4121986

4121986


Gamemastery Guide

OFFICERS
DEPLOYING THE WATCH
If no guard is present, it takes at
least 1–2 rounds for a civilian to
find a guard to sound an alarm
whistle. If a guard was on the scene,
they sound the alarm immediately.
Reinforcements typically arrive 2–3
rounds later.

BARRISTER
Barristers may serve as criminal prosecutors or as legal advocates, defending the rights
of those accused of crimes or named as defendants in civil cases. In a court case or other
legal proceeding, the barrister is a 4th-level challenge.

BARRISTER
LN

MEDIUM

CREATURE –1
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +6
Languages Common
Skills Deception +10, Diplomacy +12, Legal Lore +13, Performance +10,
Society +9
Str +0, Dex +1, Con +1, Int +3, Wis +2, Cha + 4
Items court garb (functions as fine clothing), law book (functions as
scholarly journal), writing set
Sway the Judge and Jury A barrister gains a +2 circumstance bonus
to Diplomacy checks to Make an Impression or Request something of
the deciding members within a courtroom. If the barrister successfully Performs
against a DC of 20 during the 20 minutes prior to the check, they increase the
circumstance bonus to +4.
AC 13; Fort +3, Ref +3, Will +12
HP 8
Speed 25 feet
Melee  fist +4 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d4 bludgeoning
Cite Precedent  (auditory, linguistic) The barrister uses existing case law to
undermine their opposition. If they succeed at a DC 20 Legal Lore check, they impose a
–2 circumstance penalty on the next Diplomacy check an opponent attempts in a legal
argument. Any further attempts to Cite Precedent fail until a new topic with different
precedents is being argued.

18834040

18834040

Larger societies rely on those with the authority and the ability to interpret and enforce
laws. In good-aligned societies, these officials carry out their duties fairly. In neutral
and evil ones, these officials can be harsh and cruel (with an altered alignment to reflect
this), imposing severe punishments on those who can’t pay for mercy.

4121986

GUARD
Guards are rank-and-file members of a town watch or city guard, trained to look
for trouble, take down criminals, and follow orders. They are a match for only the
most fledgling of adventurers and criminals, but, given time, the settlement can usually
muster them in numbers sufficient to neutralize most threats.

GUARD
LN

BARRISTER

MEDIUM

CREATURE 1
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +7 (+8 to find concealed objects)
Languages Common
Skills Athletics +7, Intimidation +5, Legal Lore +3
Str +4, Dex +2, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha –1
Items crossbow (10 bolts), club, dagger, sap, scale mail, signal whistle
AC 18; Fort +7, Ref +5, Will +5
HP 20
Attack of Opportunity 
Speed 25 feet
Melee  club +9, Damage 1d6+4 bludgeoning
Melee  sap +9 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d6+4 bludgeoning
Ranged  crossbow +7 (range increment 120 feet, reload 1), Damage 1d8 piercing
Ranged  club +7 (thrown 10 feet), Damage 1d6+4 bludgeoning

232

18834040

4121987

4121987

18834041

18834041


NPC Gallery

ARCHER SENTRY
Archer sentries slightly outrank the rank-and-file guards, taking positions on walls,
garrisons, and other important locations where they can stay out of the fray and pick
off criminals or assailants.

ARCHER SENTRY
LN

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 2
HUMANOID

Perception +11
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +8, Athletics +6, Intimidation +4, Legal Lore +4
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +3, Cha +0
Items composite longbow (100 arrows), shortsword, leather armor, signal whistle
AC 19; Fort +7, Ref +10, Will +7
HP 30
Speed 25 feet
Melee  shortsword +10 (agile, finesse, versatile P), Damage 1d6+3 slashing
Ranged  composite longbow +10 (deadly 1d10, range increment 100 feet, reload 0,
volley 30 feet), Damage 1d8+2 piercing
Sentry’s Aim  (concentrate) The archer sentry aims carefully and fires. They
make a ranged weapon Strike with a +1 circumstance bonus. The Strike ignores
the concealed condition, lesser cover, and standard cover, and reduces greater
cover to standard cover.

5
introduction

RAISE THE ALARM!
In a settlement with an alarm, brawls
or other major disruptions trigger
an alarm 1 round after the watch is
alerted. Guards start to arrive after
about 5 rounds, usually in patrols of
2 or 3 members, with larger groups
of 8–12 near important locations.

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

JAILER
A jailer’s primary responsibility is to keep prisoners from
escaping. Jailers must often use force, or the threat of
force, to keep their charges in line, as even the most
carefully crafted cells, manacles, or chains can fail
with time and persistence when the prisoners have
the will to attempt an escape.

JAILER
LN

MEDIUM

4121987

CREATURE 3
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +9 (+10 to find concealed objects)
Languages Common
Skills Athletics +11, Diplomacy +5, Intimidation +7
Str +4, Dex +3, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha +0
Items club, crossbow (20 bolts), keyring, simple manacles, signal
whistle, studded leather armor
AC 20; Fort +8, Ref +10, Will +7
HP 45
Attack of Opportunity 
Speed 25 feet
Melee  club +11, Damage 1d6+8 bludgeoning
Ranged  crossbow +10 (range increment 120 feet, reload 1), Damage 1d8+4
piercing
Melee  club +10 (thrown 10 feet), Damage 1d6+6 bludgeoning
Efficient Capture  (attack, manipulate) Requirements The jailer has manacles in
hand and is adjacent to a creature; Effect The jailer attempts to bind the creature’s
wrists or ankles with the manacles. If the jailer succeeds at an attack roll with a +9
modifier against the target’s AC, they apply the manacles.
Intimidating Strike  (emotion, fear, fighter, mental) The jailer makes a melee
Strike. If it hits and deals damage, the target is frightened 1, or frightened 2
on a critical hit.
Subdue Prisoners The jailer doesn’t take the normal penalty for making a
nonlethal attack when attacking with their club.

JAILER

233

18834041

4121988

4121988


Gamemastery Guide

WATCH OFFICER
JAILBREAK!
If a PC or ally gets imprisoned, the
group might plot a jailbreak. For
a complex jail or penitentiary, this
might require use of the infiltration
subsystem (described on page 160).
With a smaller town or city jail with
a simple structure and small staff, it
could require just a bit of force. The
jailbreak might just be the beginning,
leading to additional adventure!

18834042

18834042

Watch officers are assigned to a certain area within a city or community. Often
leading a small team of lower-ranking guards, they patrol those areas to maintain
order and enforce laws. Watch officers get the job done, though their methods
are not always gentle or kind. Because the watch officer is responsible to their
superiors for their area, they sometimes need to make tough decisions between
justice and effectiveness.

WATCH OFFICER
LN

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 3
HUMANOID

Perception +8 (+9 to Sense Motive)
Languages Common
Skills Athletics +11, Diplomacy +6, Intimidation +9, Legal Lore +7, Society +5
Str +4, Dex +1, Con +3, Int +0, Wis +1, Cha +1
Items breastplate, crossbow (20 bolts), dagger, signal whistle, steel shield (Hardness 5,
20 HP, BT 10), warhammer
AC 20 (22 with shield raised); Fort +10, Ref +6, Will +8
HP 45
Air of Authority (aura, emotion, mental) 10 feet. Creatures in the aura who are the same or
lower level than the watch officer take a –2 status penalty to their Will DC against the
watch officer’s attempts to Coerce or Demoralize them.
Bravery When the captain of the guard rolls a success on a Will save against
a fear effect, they get a critical success instead. In addition, any time they
gain the frightened condition, reduce its value by 1.
Attack of Opportunity 
Shield Block 
Speed 25 feet
Melee  warhammer +13 (shove), Damage 1d8+7 bludgeoning
Ranged  crossbow +10 (range increment 120 feet, reload 1), Damage
1d8+3 piercing
Sudden Charge  Frequency once per round; Effect The watch officer
Strides twice. If they end their movement within melee reach of at least
one enemy, they can make a melee Strike against that enemy.

4121988

CAPTAIN OF THE GUARD
The captain of the guard leads a troop
of soldiers who serve as security forces
for a powerful individual, most often
a high-ranking noble or very rich
merchant, though this stat block could
also represent a lower-ranking captain
of the guard for the leader of a nation.
A formidable opponent in their own
right, the captain of the guard skillfully
employs their troops to protect the life and
health of their ward.

CAPTAIN OF THE GUARD
LN

WATCH OFFICER

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 6

HUMANOID

Perception +15
Languages Common
Skills Athletics+15, Diplomacy +11, Intimidation +13, Legal Lore +12,
Society +10, Warfare Lore +8
Str +5, Dex +0, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +3, Cha +3
Items crossbow (20 bolts), dagger, full plate, +1 longsword, steel
shield (Hardness 5, 20 HP, BT 10)

234

18834042

4121989

4121989

18834043

18834043


NPC Gallery

AC 24 (26 with shield raised); Fort +14, Ref +12, Will +15
HP 95
Aura of Command (aura, emotion, mental) 30 feet. The captain of the guard bolsters
lower‑level guards under their command, granting them a +1 status bonus to their
attack rolls and a +2 status bonus to their Will saves.
Bravery As watch officer.
Shield Warden When the captain has their shield raised, they can Shield Block when an
attack is made against an adjacent ally. If they do, the shield prevents that ally from
taking damage instead of the captain.
Attack of Opportunity 
Shield Block 
Speed 20 feet
Melee  longsword +18 (magical, versatile P), Damage 1d8+11 slashing
Ranged  crossbow +12 (range increment 120 feet, reload 1), Damage 1d8+6 piercing
Shielded Advance  Requirements The captain of the guard has their shield raised;
Effect The captain of the guard presses forward, using their shield to push back foes.
The captain Strides and Shoves, in either order. The multiple attack penalty doesn’t
apply to this Shove, though the Shove does count toward the captain’s multiple
attack penalty.

5
introduction

UNUSUAL MISDEMEANORS
• Altering the weather without a
permit
• Consuming (or refusing
to consume) intoxicating
substances on celebration days
• Failing to clean up after animal
companions
• Flying within city limits
• Selling potions without a license

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

EXECUTIONER
Executioners carry out sentences from cruel tyrants and legitimate rulers
alike. Most remain numb to the necessity of their duty, but some evil
executioners grow to love the power of having someone else’s life in
their hands.

EXECUTIONER
LN

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 6

4121989

HUMANOID

Perception +12
Languages Common
Skills Athletics +15, Intimidation +13, Medicine +10
Str +5, Dex +2, Con +3, Int –1, Wis +2, Cha +2
Items +1 greataxe, hood, leather armor
AC 23; Fort +15, Ref +12, Will +14
HP 105
Speed 25 feet
Melee  greataxe +16 (magical, sweep), Damage 1d12+9 slashing
Behead  Requirements The executioner is adjacent to a dying
creature or a creature specifically prepared for a killing blow; Effect
The executioner Strikes the creature with their greataxe. On a hit, in
addition to taking damage, the target must attempt a Fortitude save or
be reduced to 0 HP and become dying 1. If the creature was already
dying (including if it was reduced to 0 HP by the Strike’s damage),
the creature’s dying value increases by 1, in addition to any increase
from the Strike. On a critical failure, the creature dies instantly. If the
executioner’s Strike was a critical hit, the target uses the outcome for
one degree of success worse than the result of their saving throw.
Intimidating Strike  (emotion, fear, fighter, mental) The
executioner makes a melee Strike. If it hits and deals damage, the
target is frightened 1, or frightened 2 on a critical hit.
Mark for Death  (concentrate) The executioner marks a single creature
they can see for death. The first time each round the executioner
Strikes that creature, the Strike deals 1d12 additional precision
damage. The creature remains marked for death until the
executioner is knocked out, marks a different creature for
death, or the encounter ends.

CAPTAIN OF THE GUARD

235

18834043

4121990

4121990


Gamemastery Guide

PERFORMERS

Performances can serve as entertainment, expressions of beauty, or part of a
shared culture.

DANCER
Dance can be used to tell stories, share emotions, provide entertainment, and
display a performer’s athletic ability. The dancer is a 5th-level challenge for
dance contests.

DANCER
N

MEDIUM

CREATURE 1
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +3
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +8, Athletics +8, Diplomacy +7, Performance +13 (+15 when
dancing), Stealth +6, Theater Lore +5
Str +1, Dex +3, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +0, Cha +4
Items dagger (3), jewelry and clothes (worth 10 gp)
AC 16; Fort +6, Ref +8, Will +3
HP 20
Speed 25 feet
Melee  dagger +8 (agile, finesse, versatile S), Damage 1d4+3 piercing
Melee  foot +8 (agile, finesse, nonlethal), Damage 1d4+3 bludgeoning
Melee  dagger +8 (agile, thrown 10 feet, versatile S), Damage 1d4+3 piercing
Fascinating Dance  Frequency once per round; Effect The dancer Strides up to their
Speed. Once during this movement, when the dancer is adjacent to a creature, the
dancer can make that creature attempt a DC 17 Will save. On a failure, that
creature is fascinated with the dancer until the end of its next turn.
18834044

18834044

4121990

ACROBAT
Acrobats perform feats of agility, balance, and
strength. The acrobat is a 5th-level challenge
for contests of acrobatics and the like.

ACROBAT
N

ACROBAT

MEDIUM

CREATURE 2
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +6
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +15, Athletics +8, Circus Lore +5, Deception +5, Performance +9, Stealth +8
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +2, Int +1, Wis +0, Cha +1
Items climbing kit, dagger (5), rope (50 feet)
Steady Balance When the acrobat rolls a success on an Acrobatics check, they get a
critical success instead. They aren’t flat-footed when attempting to Balance and can
attempt an Acrobatics check instead of a Reflex save to Grab an Edge.
AC 18; Fort +8, Ref +12, Will +4
HP 28
Cat Fall The acrobat treats all falls as 50 feet shorter.
Nimble Dodge  Trigger The acrobat is targeted with a melee or ranged attack by an
attacker they can see; Effect The acrobat gains a +2 circumstance bonus to AC against
the triggering attack.
Speed 30 feet
Melee  dagger +10 (agile, finesse, versatile S), Damage 1d4+4 piercing
Melee  foot +10 (agile, finesse, nonlethal), Damage 1d4+4 bludgeoning
Ranged  dagger +11 (agile, thrown 10 feet, versatile S), Damage 1d4+4 piercing
Sneak Attack The acrobat deals an extra 1d6 precision damage to flat-footed creatures.
Swinging Strike [two-actions] The acrobat swings on a rope or trapeze, moving up to double their
Speed. At any point during the swing, they can make a melee Strike.

236

18834044

4121991

4121991

18834045

18834045


NPC Gallery

TROUBADOUR
Troubadours keep alive the traditional songs of their cultural and write original
works to commemorate major events.

TROUBADOUR
N

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 3
HUMANOID

Perception +8
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +8, Deception +9, Diplomacy +9, Performance +13 (+14 when playing
the lute), Occultism +7, Society +7, Stealth +8, Theater Lore +9
Str +0, Dex +3, Con +0, Int +2, Wis +1, Cha +4
Items crossbow (10 bolts), leather armor, lute, poetry book, rapier
Bardic Lore The troubadour can Recall Knowledge on any subject with a +7 modifier.
AC 19; Fort +5, Ref +10, Will +8
HP 38
Speed 25 feet
Melee  rapier +12 (deadly 1d8, disarm, finesse), Damage 1d6+3 piercing
Ranged  crossbow +12 (range increment 120 feet, reload 1), Damage 1d8+3 piercing
Occult Spontaneous Spells DC 21; 2nd (2 slots) calm emotions, charm, magic mouth; 1st
(3 slots) charm, illusory disguise, soothe, ventriloquism; Cantrips (2nd) detect magic,
ghost sound, message, prestidigitation, read aura
Bard Composition Spells 2 Focus Points, DC 21; 2nd counter performance (Core Rulebook
386), lingering composition (Core Rulebook 387); Cantrips (2nd) inspire courage (Core
Rulebook 386)

5
introduction

LET’S SEE A SHOW
Prices for a night’s entertainment
are per head and can be far higher
for world-class performers. Circus
1 sp; Dance 2 cp social, 6 cp stage
performance, 1 gp high-society ball;
Stage Play 6 cp small theater, 1 sp
major theater; Opera 5 gp general
admission, 20 gp box seats; Music
5 cp troubadours, 2 sp orchestra;
Street Performance tips of 1–2 cp.

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

BEAST TAMER
Beast tamers bring the wild to civilization, rearing and
training creatures to follow their commands and perform
flashy tricks that entertain audiences.

BEAST TAMER
N

MEDIUM

HUMAN

4121991

CREATURE 4
HUMANOID

Perception +12
Languages Common, Druidic
Skills Athletics +8, Circus Lore +6, Diplomacy +8, Intimidation +8, Nature +12,
Performance +8, Survival +10
Str +2, Dex +1, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +4, Cha +2
Items holly and mistletoe, leather armor, rope (50 feet), whip
Wild Empathy The beast tamer can use Diplomacy to Make an Impression on animals
and to make very simple Requests of them.
AC 20; Fort +10, Ref +7, Will +12
HP 54
Speed 25 feet
Melee  whip +11 (disarm, nonlethal, reach, trip), Damage 1d4+5 slashing
Primal Prepared Spells DC 22, attack +14; 2nd animal form, animal messenger,
speak with animals; 1st grease, jump, magic fang; Cantrips (2nd) dancing lights,
guidance, produce flame, stabilize, tanglefoot
Druid Order Spells 1 Focus Point, DC 22; 1st heal animal (Core Rulebook 399)
Trained Animal The beast tamer fights alongside a trained animal ally of its
level or lower, most likely a tiger (Bestiary 53). The animal has the standard
number of actions, uses its normal stat block, and counts toward the
encounter’s XP budget normally.
The beast tamer can spend 1 action to gain the support benefit
appropriate to its trained animal (Core Rulebook 215). Unlike for an
animal companion, this doesn’t require the animal to use any of
its actions.

TROUBADOUR

237

18834045

4121992

4121992


Gamemastery Guide

PUBLICANS
TAP LIST
Ale: Andoren beer, Boulderhead
bock, Cheerful Delver stout, Liquid
Ghosts, Luglurch ale, Thileu lager.
Cider and Mead: Hardroot cider,
Qadiran cider, Two Knight Brewery
mead, Wineberry mead.
Wine: Irrisen icewine, sarain,
syrinelle, Whiterose Abbey wine
Spirits: Daggermark drip, dragon
punch whiskey, Old Erebus, vjarik.

SERVER
Always on the move from patron to patron, servers are the backbone of any tavern or
eatery. Their work hones both their agility and their diplomacy.

SERVER
N

MEDIUM

CREATURE –1
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +3
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +6, Diplomacy +4, Thievery +5
Str +1, Dex +4, Con +0, Int +0, Wis +1, Cha +2
Items pewter mug, serving tray
AC 16; Fort +2, Ref +7, Will +5
HP 7
Quick Catch  Trigger An object that the server could hold in one hand is dropped
within the server’s reach; Requirements The server has at least one hand free;
Effect The server catches the dropped object before it hits the floor or leaves
their reach.
Speed 25 feet
Melee  fist +6 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d4+1 bludgeoning
Ranged  pewter mug +6 (thrown 10 feet), Damage 1d4+1 bludgeoning

BARKEEP
Barkeeps are often friends and mentors within a community, lending an ear
while supplying libations. The best barkeeps have some talent for storytelling
and passing on valuable advice.

18834046

18834046

Countless adventures begin in a tavern or a pub. Maybe it’s because such places
attract the risk-prone, or maybe it’s because everyone needs a little liquid courage
before they decide to take on a group of rampaging ogres.

BARKEEP
N

BARKEEP

MEDIUM

4121992

CREATURE 1
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +6
Languages Common
Skills Alcohol Lore +9, Athletics +6, Deception +6, Diplomacy +8, Performance +6,
Society +5, Thievery +3
Str +3, Dex +0, Con +2, Int +0, Wis +1, Cha +3
Items barkeep’s apron (functions as padded armor), flask of whiskey, pewter mug, sap
AC 14; Fort +7, Ref +3, Will +6
HP 25
Speed 25 feet
Melee  sap +6 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d6+3 bludgeoning
Melee  fist +6 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d4+3 bludgeoning
Ranged  pewter mug +3 (thrown 10 feet), Damage 1d4+3 bludgeoning
Bar Brawler The barkeep has been in enough bar fights to know how to throw
a few punches. When fighting in their bar and making a nonlethal attack, the
barkeep gains a +1 circumstance bonus to attack rolls and deals an additional
1d4 damage.
Barkeep’s Advice  (auditory, fortune, linguistic, mental) Frequency
once per day; Effect The barkeep gives some pertinent advice to a single
creature other than themself. For 24 hours, when that creature fails a skill
check or saving throw, they can recall this advice and reroll the check, using
the second result instead. Once that creature uses this ability, its effect ends.
A creature that receives the Barkeep’s Advice is temporarily immune to the
ability for 1 month.

238

18834046

4121993

4121993

18834047

18834047


NPC Gallery

INNKEEPER
The sight of an inn is a welcome one to any weary traveler. Innkeepers can often
be found cleaning the common room, overseeing the evening meal, or settling
in new lodgers. Innkeepers keep an eye on their neighbors’ doings and are often
excellent sources of information.

INNKEEPER
N

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 1
HUMANOID

Perception +7
Languages Common
Skills Accounting Lore +5, Cooking Lore +5, Deception +6, Diplomacy +8, Society +7
Str +2, Dex +0, Con +1, Int +2, Wis +2, Cha +3
Items broom (functions as staff), innkeeper’s apron (functions as leather armor), ledger
Font of Gossip The inkeeper’s business gives them insight into the neighborhood’s
happenings. When Gathering Information, a person can gain as much information
chatting with the innkeeper for 30 minutes to an hour as they would gain from
2 hours spent canvassing the neighborhood. Each person can learn gossip from
an innkeeper only once per day, and only if the innkeeper is friendly or helpful
to that individual. Whatever information the innkeeper knows about a given topic
doesn’t change if someone else asks the innkeeper about that topic, unless the
innkeeper has since learned more.
AC 14; Fort +6, Ref +3, Will +9
HP 20
Speed 25 feet
Melee  broom +7 (two-hand d8), Damage 1d4+2 bludgeoning
Melee  fist +7 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d4+2 bludgeoning
Ranged  ledger +5 (nonlethal, thrown 10 feet), Damage 1d4+2 bludgeoning
Home Turf An innkeeper gains a +2 circumstance bonus to attack rolls,
damage rolls, and AC within their inn.

5
introduction

BAR FIGHT!
Bar fights work better without a
grid. Use the stat blocks here or in
the Downtrodden section for notable
participants, everyone else attacking
nonlethally with fists or improvised
weapons. Roll one or two attacks at
the end of each round against each
PC in the fight (+4 attack modifier,
1d4+2 bludgeoning damage). Alcohol
rules can be found on page 120.

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4121993

DRUNKARD
Every tavern has one—that person who drinks a little too much and
starts a fight. While many drunkards are relatively harmless, a few have
a hair trigger, and when they’re set off come, no one—even the drunkard
themself—can tell you what started the row.

DRUNKARD
N

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 2
HUMANOID

Perception +6
Languages Common
Skills Alcohol Lore +3, Athletics +7, Intimidation +8
Str +3, Dex +2, Con +4, Int –1, Wis +0, Cha +2
Items drunkard’s outfit (functions as padded armor), pewter mug
AC 17; Fort +10, Ref +8, Will +6
HP 40
Speed 25 feet
Melee  fist +9 (agile, nonlethal); Damage 1d6+3 bludgeoning
Ranged  pewter mug +8 (thrown 10 feet); Damage 1d4+3 bludgeoning
Drunken Rage  (concentrate, emotion, mental) Requirements The drunkard is drunk,
and isn’t fatigued or raging; Effect Something sets the drunkard off, causing them to
fly into a drunken rage. They gain 6 temporary Hit Points that last until the drunken
rage ends. While raging, they deal 4 additional damage with melee attacks and take
a –1 penalty to AC. The drunkard can’t use concentrate actions except Seek
and rage actions. The rage lasts for 1 minute or until the drunkard falls
unconscious or sobers up. The drunkard can’t voluntarily stop the Drunken
Rage. Once the rage ends, the drunkard can’t Rage again for 1 minute.

DRUNKARD

239

18834047

4121994

4121994


Gamemastery Guide

SCHOLARS
UNCOMMON SCHOLASTIC
DISCIPLINES
Beside the life and natural sciences
such as arcana, biology, botany,
geology, oceanography, and zoology,
demand is increasing in cities
for more modern disciplines, like
anthropology, economics, sociology,
urban planning, and even art
curation and forensic investigation.

LIBRARIAN
Keepers of knowledge, librarians document discoveries, events, and laws. The
best librarians record events twice; once for public record, and again to record
how events truly unfolded. A librarian typically knows four to six additional
languages, often including Elven and Draconic. A librarian is a 3rd-level challenge
for encounters involving research.

LIBRARIAN
N

CREATURE –1

MEDIUM

HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +7
Languages Common
Skills Academia Lore +11, Arcana +9, Library Lore +13, Nature +8, Religion +8
Str +0, Dex +1, Con +0, Int +4, Wis +3, Cha +1
Items dagger, writing set
Methodical Research (concentrate) When Searching
through stacks of books, a librarian can find the answer to
almost any question. This allows the librarian to use Library Lore
in place of other lore skills, given enough time. The GM determines
the DC of the check and the amount of time it takes (typically, a
librarian can attempt three or four checks during 1 day of downtime).
AC 13; Fort +2, Ref +3, Will +7
HP 6
Speed 25 feet
Melee  book +4 (nonlethal), Damage 1d4 bludgeoning
Melee  fist +3 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d4 bludgeoning
Ranged  book +5 (nonlethal, thrown 10 feet), Damage 1d4 bludgeoning

18834048

18834048

True power comes from knowledge: the power to shape the growth of kingdoms
by mere whispers, staying three steps ahead of adversaries, or even knowing which
flora is best for creating untraceable poisons.

4121994

TEACHER
The passing of knowledge and traditions from generation to generation is a
time-honored occupation. Teachers exist to strengthen their populations with
literacy, history, and advanced sciences, but most of all with inspiration. Most
teachers provide general knowledge so their students are well rounded, but
some are experts or even masters of a single discipline. A teacher typically
knows three languages in addition to Common. For academic encounters, a
teacher is a 4th‑level challenge.

TEACHER
N

TEACHER

MEDIUM

CREATURE –1
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +4
Languages Common
Skills Academia Lore +14, Diplomacy +7, Intimidation +5, one additional Lore +14
Str +0, Dex +0, Con –1, Int +4, Wis +2, Cha +3
Items cane (functions as staff), textbook, writing set
Font of Knowledge The teacher can attempt to Recall Knowledge on any general subject
with a +10 modifier.
Inspirational Presence (aura, emotion, mental) 50 feet. Any of the teacher’s students in
the aura gains a +1 circumstance bonus to Recall Knowledge.
AC 12; Fort +1, Ref +2, Will +6
HP 5
Speed 25 feet
Melee  cane +4 (two-hand d8), Damage 1d4 bludgeoning

240

18834048

4121995

4121995

18834049

18834049


NPC Gallery

ASTRONOMER
Different cultures have created stories of the hows and whys of the universe, if
things exist beyond the stars, and if the gods manipulate the heavenly bodies. But
astronomers aren’t interested in folktales—they desire truth.

ASTRONOMER
N

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 2
HUMANOID

Perception +10
Languages Common
Skills Arcana +8, Astronomy Lore +12, Occultism +8
Str +0, Dex +1, Con +2, Int +4, Wis +3, Cha +0
Items astrolabe, spellbook, spell component pouch, staff
Living Sextant If the astronomer is able to see the night sky, they can Sense Direction
using a +10 modifier.
AC 15; Fort +6, Ref +5, Will +9
HP 23
Counterspell  Trigger A creature Casts a Spell the astronomer has prepared; Effect The
astronomer expends a prepared spell to counter the triggering creature’s casting of that
same spell. The astronomer loses its spell slot as if it had cast the triggering spell. The
astronomer then attempts to counteract the triggering spell.
Speed 25 feet
Melee  staff +6 (two-hand d8), Damage 1d4 bludgeoning
Arcane Prepared Spells DC 17, attack +9; 1st (4 slots) feather fall, floating disk,
sleep, unseen servant, Cantrips (1st) detect magic, mage hand, read aura, sigil,
telekinetic projectile

5
introduction

CENTERS OF LEARNING
Kitharodian Academy (Taldor):
Famed bardic college teaching
students of all social classes.
Magaambya (Nantambu): Ancient
school with some of the world’s
greatest stores of arcane knowledge.
University of Lepidstadt (Ustalav):
School primarily focusing on alchemy,
medicine, and scientific study.

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

SAGE
The greatest knowledge comes from experience. Village elders, ancient seers,
and advisors to royalty are examples of individuals who are valued for their
experiences. Sages serve their people as much as their sovereigns. They educate
and try to prevent their people from straying from their cultures’ acceptable
norms and traditions. Sages rarely take power for themselves, as they take their
responsibility seriously to guide wisely and empower those they serve.

SAGE
N

MEDIUM

4121995

CREATURE 6
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +14
Languages Common
Skills Arcana +12, Diplomacy +13, Medicine +12, Nature +14, Occultism +12,
Religion +12, Society +14
Str +2, Dex +2, Con +1, Int +4, Wis +3, Cha +0
Items religious symbol, +1 staff
AC 22; Fort +10, Ref +12, Will +16
HP 86
Timely Advice  (auditory, concentrate, linguistic, mental) Trigger An ally
is about to attempt an attack roll or skill check and has not yet rolled;
Effect The sage gives the ally a savvy piece of advice, providing valuable
insight. The ally gains a +2 circumstance bonus to the triggering roll.
Speed 25 feet
Melee  staff +12 (magical, two-hand d8), Damage 1d4+5 bludgeoning
Sage’s Analysis  (concentrate) The sage studies a creature, attempting an
Arcana, Nature, Occultism, Religion, or Society check against the creature’s
Recall Knowledge DC. On a success, the sage gains a +2 circumstance bonus
to attack rolls and AC against that creature and deals an additional 2d6
damage to the creature with weapon attacks. These benefits last for 1 minute
or until the sage uses this ability again.

ASTRONOMER

241

18834049

4121996

4121996


Gamemastery Guide

SEAFARERS
SHIPBOARD SPELLS
The captain can gain all these spells
in place of Dual Disarm. The bosun
can exchange Pike and Strike to gain
the cantrips and 1st-level spells.
Primal Prepared Spells DC 24 (DC 18
bosun), attack +16 (+10 bosun); 2nd
summon elemental, water breathing,
water walk; 1st feather fall, gust
of wind (×2); Cantrips (2nd, 1st for
bosun) electric arc, guidance, know
direction, light, tanglefoot

18834050

18834050

Adventurers may need passage on a swift vessel, or they might face danger from
raiders at sea or in coastal settlements.

NAVIGATOR
A navigator uses celestial bodies and shipping lanes to determine routes. For
noncombat tasks involving navigation or sailing, the navigator is a 4th-level challenge.

NAVIGATOR
N

MEDIUM

CREATURE 2

HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +9
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +6, Nature +11, Sailing Lore +14, Society +8, Survival +9
Str +0, Dex +2, Con +1, Int +4, Wis +3, Cha +0
Items dagger, scroll case with ship’s charts, writing set
Chart a Course (concentrate) By spending 10 minutes of work and succeeding at a DC 22
Sailing Lore check, the navigator plots an optimal course. The severity of environmental
conditions other than temperature are reduced by one step for 24 hours (two steps
on a critical success). This changes moderate damage to minor damage, winds
that create greater difficult terrain cause only difficult terrain, and so on.
AC 18; Fort +7, Ref +8, Will +9
HP 28
Speed 25 feet
Melee  dagger +8 (agile, finesse, versatile S), Damage 1d4+4
piercing plus navigator’s edge
Ranged  dagger +8 (agile, thrown 10 feet, versatile S), Damage 1d4+4
piercing plus navigator’s edge
Navigator’s Edge The navigator deals an additional 1d6 weapon damage
when on a ship.

4121996

PIRATE
These scourges of the seas are a threat to anyone who spends time away from land.

PIRATE
CN

NAVIGATOR

MEDIUM

CREATURE 2
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +6
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +7, Athletics +8, Deception +6, Intimidation +6, Sailing
Lore +8
Str +2, Dex +3, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +2, Cha + 2
Items cutlass (functions as a scimitar), dagger, padded armor
AC 18; Fort +7, Ref +8, Will +6
HP 32
Attack of Opportunity 
Bravery When the pirate rolls a success on a Will save against a fear
effect, they get a critical success instead. In addition, anytime they
gain the frightened condition, reduce its value by 1.
Speed 25 feet
Melee  cutlass +10 (forceful, sweep), Damage 1d6+5 slashing
Melee  dagger +11 (agile, versatile S), Damage 1d4+5 piercing
Ranged  dagger +11 (agile, thrown 10 feet, versatile S), Damage
1d4+5 piercing
Boarding Action [two-actions] The pirate swings on a rope or Strides, moving
up to double their Speed. If the pirate boarded or disembarked a boat
during this movement, they can make a melee Strike at the end of their
movement that deals one extra damage die on a hit.

242

18834050

4121997

4121997


NPC Gallery

BOSUN
A ship’s boatswain, or bosun, leads the deckhands who maintain the ship.

BOSUN
N

MEDIUM

CREATURE 3
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +8
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +9, Athletics +9, Intimidation +9, Sailing Lore +11
Str +2, Dex +4, Con +1, Int +0, Wis +1, Cha +2
Items dagger, naval pike (functions as spear)
AC 19; Fort +6, Ref +11, Will +8
HP 45
Speed 25 feet
Melee  fist +13 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d6+5 bludgeoning
Melee  naval pike +11, Damage 1d6+5 piercing
Melee  dagger +13 (agile, versatile S), Damage 1d4+5 piercing
Ranged  naval pike +13 (thrown 20 feet), Damage 1d6+5 piercing
Bosun’s Command  (auditory, concentrate, emotion, linguistic, mental) Frequency once
per round; Effect The bosun orders an ally to attack or to get in position. Until the end of
the ally’s next turn, they gain the bosun’s choice of a +2 status bonus to attack rolls or a
+10-foot status bonus to their Speeds.
Pike and Strike [two-actions] The bosun Strikes with their naval pike.
If this Strike hits, the bosun can either move
the target 5 feet within the pike’s reach or
make a fist Strike against the target without
increasing their multiple attack penalty until
after the fist Strike.

5
introduction

NAUTICAL SUPERSTITIONS
• Never use phrases like “good luck,”
“drowned,” or “goodbye.”
• No whistling onboard.
• Never kill certain creatures, such
as albatrosses or dolphins.
• Never change the name of a vessel
without protective rites.
• Never set sail on certain days of
the week.
• Tengus absorb bad luck into
themselves to create good luck.

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

18834051

18834051

4121997

SHIP CAPTAIN
The captain is the ultimate authority on a vessel, responsible for the livelihood and
well-being of everyone on the ship.

SHIP CAPTAIN
LN

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 6
HUMANOID

Perception +12
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +10, Athletics +12, Diplomacy +11, Intimidation +13, Sailing Lore +17,
Survival +10
Str +4, Dex +2, Con +0, Int +1, Wis +2, Cha +3
Items dagger, hand crossbow (10 bolts), leather armor, +1 rapier
AC 23; Fort +12, Ref +12, Will +14
HP 90
Bravery As pirate.
Speed 25 feet
Melee  rapier +17 (deadly 1d8, disarm, magical), Damage 1d6+10 piercing
Melee  main-gauche +16 (agile, disarm, parry, versatile S), Damage 1d4+10 piercing
Ranged  hand crossbow +14 (range increment 60 feet, reload 1), Damage 1d6+6
piercing
Dual Disarm [two-actions] The captain makes two Strikes, one with their rapier and one with
their main-gauche (in either order). If both Strikes hit, the ship captain can attempt
to Disarm the target. Their multiple attack penalty increases only after all the
attacks are made.
No Quarter!  (auditory, concentrate, emotion, linguistic, mental) The captain
orders their shipmates to fight without mercy. All allied creatures of equal
or lower level within 20 feet of the ship captain gain a +1 status bonus to
attack rolls and damage rolls until the end of the ship captain’s next turn.

BOSUN

243

18834051

4121998

4121998


Gamemastery Guide

TRADESPEOPLE
COMMON ARTISAN GUILDS
Cartographers
Cobblers
Cooks and bakers
Glassblowers
Herbalists
Jewelers and gem cutters
Leatherworkers
Locksmiths
Magecrafters
Masons and stonecutters
Painters and sign makers

APPRENTICE
Ambitious apprentices can be found in all cities. These individuals are generally
younger and seek the approval of their masters as they learn their craft. Many yearn
to exemplify the artistry behind their craft, one day becoming masters themselves.
Depicted below is an apprentice cartographer.

APPRENTICE
N

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE –1
HUMANOID

Perception +2
Languages Common
Skills Athletics +3, Crafting +5, Geography Lore +5
Str +1, Dex +2, Con +1, Int +3, Wis +0, Cha +0
Items artisan’s tools, assorted maps, rugged clothes with tool belt (functions as
padded armor)
AC 15; Fort +5, Ref +6, Will +2
HP 8
Speed 25 feet
Melee  dagger +3 (agile, versatile S), Damage 1d4+1 piercing
Ranged  dagger +4 (agile, thrown 10 feet, versatile S), Damage 1d4+1 piercing
Apprentice’s Ambition [free-action] Frequency once per day; Requirements A direct superior
is supervising the apprentice; Effect The apprentice gains a +2 circumstance bonus
to attack rolls, damage rolls, saving throws, and skill checks until the end of their
next turn.

18834052

18834052

Every settlement needs tradespeople to create new products, facilitate commerce,
and keep the infrastructure from crumbling. Larger cities often have entire guilds
dedicated to the creation of specific goods, managing worker conditions, and
working with local governments.

4121998

MERCHANT
Small settlements can typically support one or two generalist merchants,
and larger cities house multiple specialists—experts in one type of product.
Merchants can be found anywhere: vendors hustling in the public square,
shopkeepers running small storefronts, traveling salespeople in carriages or
caravans, or wealthy tycoons running entire organizations devoted to commerce.
For encounters involving negotiation or mercantile skill, a merchant is a 4thlevel challenge. A merchant might have an additional Lore skill about a specific
category of item (such as jewelry or magic weapons), with a total skill bonus 2
higher than Mercantile Lore.

MERCHANT
N

APPRENTICE

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE –1
HUMANOID

Perception +6
Languages Common
Skills Deception +10, Diplomacy +12, Mercantile Lore +10, Performance +8, Society +8
Str +2, Dex +0, Con –1, Int +2, Wis +2, Cha +4
Items crossbow (10 bolts), padded armor
Appraising Eye The merchant can use Mercantile Lore to Recall Knowledge about items,
including determining their value. They can also attempt to Identify Magic using
Mercantile Lore and can do so without first knowing whether the item is magical.
AC 13; Fort +1, Ref +2, Will +10
HP 7
Speed 25 feet
Melee  fist +4 (agile, nonlethal, unarmed), Damage 1d4+2 bludgeoning
Ranged  crossbow +4 (range increment 120 feet, reload 1), Damage 1d8 piercing

244

18834052

4121999

4121999

18834053

18834053


NPC Gallery

SMITH
Most smaller communities have at least one smithy where locals and travelers can
have horses shod or equipment repaired. Larger settlements and cities often have
a variety of smiths, many specializing in blacksmithing, weapon smithing, armor
smithing, or even smelting coins in a mint. The smith is a 6th-level challenge when
competing with smithing or other crafting tasks.

SMITH
N

MEDIUM

CREATURE 3
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +5
Languages Common
Skills Athletics +8, Crafting +15, Diplomacy +5, Smithy Lore +15, Society +8
Str +3, Dex +1, Con +2, Int +3, Wis +0, Cha +0
Items artisan’s tools, leather apron (functions as padded armor), light hammer
AC 17; Fort +9, Ref +8, Will +5
HP 50
Speed 25 feet
Melee  light hammer +10 (agile), Damage 1d6+3 bludgeoning plus smith’s fury
Ranged  light hammer +8 (agile, thrown 20 feet), Damage 1d6+3 bludgeoning plus
smith’s fury
Smith’s Fury The smith deals an additional 1d6 damage when they hit with a weapon
they created.

5
introduction

MORE ARTISAN GUILDS
Physicians and apothecaries
Potion brewers
Potters
Scroll keepers
Shipwrights and sailmakers
Skinners and tanners
Wagonmakers and wheelwrights
Weaponsmiths
Wandcrafters
Weavers
Woodcarvers and coopers

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

GUILDMASTER
In cities, artisans working in a common trade often form
guilds to set standards of quality, establish common
prices, engage in collective bargaining with business
owners, and lobby local governments for favorable
laws. The guildmaster—often a master artisan in
their own right—also acts as an administrator and
politician, advocating for artisans in their trade. The
guildmaster is a 12th-level challenge when competing in
crafting or their area of expertise (architecture in the
example below).

GUILDMASTER
N

MEDIUM

HUMAN

4121999

CREATURE 8
HUMANOID

Perception +16
Languages Common
Skills Architecture Lore +25, Athletics +13, Bureaucracy Lore +19, Crafting +25,
Diplomacy +24, Intimidation +22, Society +21
Str +3, Dex +1, Con +1, Int +4, Wis +2, Cha +3
Items artisan’s tools, construction schematics, guildmaster’s uniform (functions as
hide armor), +1 striking light hammer, tax ledgers
AC 26; Fort +14, Ref +14, Will +17
HP 135
Speed 25 feet
Melee  light hammer +16 (agile), Damage 2d6+5 bludgeoning
Ranged  light hammer +14 (agile, magical, thrown 20 feet), Damage 2d6+5 bludgeoning
Call to Action  (auditory, concentrate, emotion, mental) The guildmaster gives a
speech to inspire themself and all guild-member allies within 60 feet, granting them
a +1 status bonus to attack and damage rolls until the start of the guildmaster’s
next turn.
Sworn Duty While within the guild or presiding over guild business, the guildmaster
gains a +2 circumstance bonus to weapon attack rolls and deals an additional
2d6 damage on a successful weapon attack.

GUILDMASTER

245

18834053

4122000

4122000


Gamemastery Guide

VILLAINS
SABOTAGE!
Though the saboteur included here
is intended to be a villain, PCs
might encounter saboteurs on the
side of good. These are typically
rebels against tyrannical forces.
Those who take great care to avoid
harming civilians are chaotic good;
others are chaotic neutral.

SABOTEUR
Saboteurs excel at infiltration, using it to perform destructive acts, whether
they are the physical destruction of a valuable object or obstructing important
political proceedings. Unlike those of spies, the motivations of saboteurs is not to
steal information, but rather to sow chaos among their enemies.

SABOTEUR
NE

MEDIUM

CREATURE 2
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +8 (+10 to find traps)
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +7, Athletics +5, Crafting +6 (+8 to Craft snares), Deception +7, Diplomacy
+5, Engineering Lore +8, Intimidation +5, Society +6, Stealth +9, Survival +6, Thievery
+9, Underworld Lore +6
Str +1, Dex +3, Con +1, Int +2, Wis +2, Cha +1
Items crowbar, disguise kit, hand crossbow (10 bolts), padded armor, sap, snare kit,
thieves’ tools
Snare Crafting The saboteur can Craft snares and has the supplies to make up to two
caltrop snares and up to two hampering snares.
AC 18 (20 vs. traps); Fort +5, Ref +9 (+11 vs. traps), Will +8
HP 27
Speed 25 feet
Melee  sap +7 (agile, nonlethal), Damage 1d6+3 bludgeoning
Ranged  hand crossbow +9 (range increment 60 feet, reload 1), Damage
1d6+2 piercing
Sneak Attack The saboteur deals an extra 1d6 precision damage to flat‑footed
creatures.

18834054

18834054

Villains pursue selfish and cruel goals, trampling over anyone foolish or purehearted
enough to stand in their way.

4122000

MASTERMIND
Masterminds weave long-ranged plots to see their nefarious goals come to
fruition, deftly manipulating those around them, and turning enemies into
friends and then pitting them against one another. When competing in a social
or intellectual arena, the mastermind is a 7th-level challenge.

MASTERMIND
NE

MASTERMIND

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 4
HUMANOID

Perception +10
Languages Common
Skills Arcana +13, Deception +15, Diplomacy +15, Intimidation +15, Occultism
+15, Performance +17, Religion +11, Society +17, Stealth +9, Thievery +9, Underworld
Lore +17
Str +0, Dex +3, Con +0, Int +4, Wis +2, Cha +4
Items chain shirt, disguise kit, hand crossbow (10 bolts), shortsword
Versatile Performance The mastermind can use Performance instead of Diplomacy to
Make an Impression and instead of Intimidation to Demoralize. The mastermind can
also use an acting Performance instead of Deception to Impersonate.
AC 21; Fort +6, Ref +11, Will +16
HP 54
Speed 25 feet
Melee  shortsword +13 (agile, finesse, versatile S), Damage 1d6+6 slashing
Ranged  hand crossbow +13 (range increment 60 feet, reload 1), Damage 1d6+3
piercing
Occult Spontaneous Spells DC 22, attack +14; 2nd (3 slots) blur, charm, invisibility,

246

18834054

4122001

4122001

18834055

18834055


NPC Gallery

paranoia; 1st (3 slots) charm, illusory disguise, illusory object; Cantrips (2nd) daze,
detect magic, message, prestidigitation, sigil
Bard Composition Spells DC 22; Cantrips (2nd) inspire competence (Core Rulebook 386),
inspire courage (Core Rulebook 386)
Scoundrel’s Feint When the mastermind successfully Feints, the target is flat-footed
against the mastermind’s melee attacks until the end of the mastermind’s next turn. On
a critical success, the target is flat-footed against all melee attacks for that time, not
just the mastermind’s.
Sneak Attack The mastermind deals an extra 1d6 precision damage to flat-footed creatures.

ANTIPALADIN
There is perhaps nothing more anathematic to peace than an antipaladin.
Dedicated holy warriors to the darkest and foulest of deities, antipaladins
work to fulfill the vile wishes of their evil masters. The zeal with which they
implement the plans of dark gods makes them truly fearsome foes for
anyone allied with the forces of good.

ANTIPALADIN
CE

MEDIUM

HUMAN

5
introduction

SERVANTS OF DESTRUCTION
Antipaladins are the polar opposite
of paladins: chaotic evil warriors
devoted to destruction. Much like
champions of good, they must follow
a code. Their code exhorts evil and
prohibits selfless acts. Antipaladins
usually serve Lamashtu, Rovagug, or
demon lords. Many antipaladins used
to be champions of good and seek to
destroy their former faiths.

Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

CREATURE 5
HUMANOID

Perception +10
Languages Common
Skills Athletics +13, Deception +10, Intimidation +12, Religion +8, Survival +8
Str +4, Dex +1, Con +3, Int +0, Wis +1, Cha + 3
Items lesser cheetah’s elixir, greataxe, half plate, javelin (10)
AC 25; Fort +14, Ref +10, Will +12

HP 75
Destructive Vengeance  (divine, necromancy) Trigger An enemy within 15
feet damages the antipaladin; Effect The antipaladin increases
the amount of damage they take by 2d6 and deals 2d6
damage to the triggering enemy, choosing evil or
negative damage. In addition, the antipaladin
deals 2 extra damage of the chosen type with
their Strikes against the triggering creature until
the end of the antipaladin’s next turn.
Speed 20 feet
Melee  greataxe +15 (sweep), Damage 1d12+10
slashing
Ranged  javelin +12 (thrown 30 feet), Damage
1d6+10 piercing
Champion Devotion Spells 1 Focus Point, DC 20; 3rd
touch of corruption (see below)
Intimidating Strike [two-actions] The antipaladin makes a
melee Strike. If they hit and deal damage, the
target is frightened 1, or frightened 2 on a
critical hit.

TOUCH OF CORRUPTION
UNCOMMON

NECROMANCY

4122001

FOCUS 3

NEGATIVE

Cast [one-action] somatic
Range touch; Targets 1 willing undead creature or 1 living creature
The antipaladin infuses the target with negative energy. If the target is living, this
deals 3d6 negative damage (basic Fortitude save); on a failed saving throw,
the target also takes a –2 status penalty to AC for 1 round. If the target is
a willing undead creature, the target regains 18 Hit Points, and if it is one
of the antipaladin’s allies, it also gains a +2 status bonus to damage rolls
for 1 round.

ANTIPALADIN

247

18834055

4122002

4122002


Gamemastery Guide

DESPOT
ALTER EGO MUTAGEN
A reckless scientist may have a
special mutagen with a 1-round
onset that transforms them into
another specific NPC or monster of
their level, with the same duration
as other mutagens. All statistics
change, though HP changes only if
the new maximum HP is lower than
the scientist’s current HP.

18834056

18834056

Despots live to amass and exploit power over others.

DESPOT
LE

MEDIUM

CREATURE 5
HUMAN

HUMANOID

Perception +11
Languages Common, Infernal
Skills Athletics +10, Deception +13, Diplomacy +12, Intimidation +13, Performance +13,
Society +12, Warfare Lore +10
Str +2, Dex +2, Con +0, Int +4, Wis +2, Cha +4
Items lesser darkvision elixir, minor healing potion (2), spiked gauntlet
Persistent Lies Any creature deceived by the despot’s Deception skill
believes the deception more readily on the next day. Any attempts to
later attempt a Perception check against the despot’s Deception DC take
a –2 circumstance penalty, as do other creatures’ attempts to convince the
creature otherwise, such as through Diplomacy or further Deception.
AC 19; Fort +9, Ref +9, Will +13
HP 56
Speed 25 feet
Melee  spiked gauntlet +11 (agile), Damage 1d4+4 piercing
Divine Spontaneous Spells DC 23, attack +13; 3rd (4 slots) chilling darkness,
enthrall, harm; 2nd calm emotions, flaming sphere, see invisibility, undetectable
alignment; 1st (4 slots) charm, command, fear, sanctuary; Cantrips (3rd) chill
touch, daze, message, produce flame, shield
Sorcerer Bloodline Spells 1 Focus Point, DC 22; 3rd diabolic edict (Core Rulebook 403)
Bloodline Magic When the despot casts a bloodline spell, enthrall, flaming sphere, or
charm, either a target takes 1 fire damage per spell level, or the despot gains a +1 status
bonus to Deception checks for 1 round.
Dangerous Sorcery When the despot Casts a Spell from a spell slot, if the spell deals
damage and doesn’t have a duration, the despot gains a status bonus equal to the spell’s
level to that spell’s damage.

4122002

RECKLESS SCIENTIST
It’s the reckless scientist’s job to break the rules of reality, no matter the cost.

RECKLESS SCIENTIST
NE

RECKLESS SCIENTIST

MEDIUM

HUMAN

CREATURE 6

HUMANOID

Perception +10
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +12, Crafting +17, Deception +9, Engineering Lore +15, Medicine +10,
Stealth +12, Underworld Lore +13
Str +1, Dex +4, Con +5, Int +5, Wis +2, Cha –1
Items alchemist’s tools, moderate antidote, moderate antiplague, bandolier, +1 sickle,
work coat (functions as padded armor)
Infused Items A reckless scientist carries the following infused items: 2 moderate
acid flasks, 2 moderate alchemist’s fires, 1 lesser bomber’s eye elixir, 2 moderate frost
vials, and 3 lesser elixirs of life. These items last for 24 hours, or until the next time
the scientist makes their daily preparations.
AC 23; Fort +17, Ref +14, Will +10; +1 status to all saves vs. poison
HP 92; Resistances poison 5
Unstable Compounds When an attacker scores a critical hit against the reckless scientist,
one of the scientist’s poorly stowed alchemical items bursts. The GM determines the item
randomly. If it was a bomb, the alchemist takes damage from the bomb, and any creature
adjacent to the alchemist takes the splash damage. Any other item is simply wasted.
Speed 25 feet
Melee  sickle +17 (agile, finesse, magical, trip), Damage 1d4+7 slashing

248

18834056

4122003

4122003

18834057

18834057


NPC Gallery

Ranged  alchemical bomb +16 (range increment 20 feet, splash), Damage varies by bomb
Quick Bomber  The reckless scientist Interacts to draw a bomb, then Strikes with it.
Reckless Alchemy  (concentrate, manipulate) Requirements The reckless scientist is
holding a bomb or elixir; Effect The reckless scientist combines the bomb with another
bomb or the elixir with another elixir. They can Interact to draw a second bomb or elixir
if necessary as part of this action. They attempt a DC 28 Crafting check, destroying
both component items to create one new item. If a viable resulting item isn’t used by
the end of the scientist’s next turn, it explodes as described under critical failure.
Critical Success The new item has the full effect of both component items when used.
Success The new item combines both items, but halves the effect of each. (This halves
damage for bombs, the amount of healing of elixirs of life, or the duration for effects
that can’t have their value halved. Details are determined by the GM.)
Failure The new item is inert.
Critical Failure The new item immediately explodes, dealing 3d6 piercing damage to
the reckless scientist.

introduction

GANG STRUCTURE
A gang leader might run a gang,
but several other NPCs in this
chapter make for good gang
members. A gang of significant size
typically has a pyramid structure
so that only a few members report
directly to the boss and it’s harder
to link crimes directly to those in
charge if someone gets arrested.

MEDIUM

HUMAN

Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules

GLOSSARY
and INDEX

Cutthroats, killers, thieves, and toughs prey upon the vulnerable of society.
Directing their activities and keeping them in line are the duties of the gang leader.

CE

Gamemastery
Basics

NPC Gallery

GANG LEADER

GANG LEADER

5

CREATURE 7
HUMANOID

Perception +14
Languages Common
Skills Acrobatics +13, Athletics +13, Deception +15, Intimidation +17, Society +11, Stealth
+13, Thievery +15, Underworld Lore +15
Str +4, Dex +4, Con +2, Int +2, Wis –1, Cha +4
Items minor potion of healing, +1 shortsword, sling (10 bullets), studded leather,
tanglefoot bag
AC 26; Fort +13, Ref +17, Will +10
HP 104
Deny Advantage The gang leader isn’t flat-footed to creatures of 7th level or lower
that are hidden, undetected, flanking, or using surprise attack.
Evasion When the gang leader rolls a success on a Reflex save, they get a
critical success instead.
Surprise Attack On the first round of combat, if the gang leader rolls
Deception or Stealth for initiative, creatures who haven’t acted are
flat-footed to the gang leader.
Nimble Dodge  Trigger The gang leader is targeted with
an attack by an attacker they can see; Effect The gang
leader gains a +2 circumstance bonus to AC against the
triggering attack.
Speed 30 feet
Melee  shortsword +18 (agile, magical, versatile S),
Damage 1d6+10 piercing
Ranged  sling +18 (propulsive, range increment 50 feet, reload 1), Damage 1d6+8
bludgeoning
Brutal Rally  (auditory, emotion, linguistic, mental) Trigger The gang leader rolls a critical
hit against a creature; Effect All allies that can see the gang leader gain a +1 circumstance
bonus to attack rolls until the start of the gang leader’s next turn.
Gang Up Any enemy is flat-footed against the gang leader’s melee attacks due to
flanking as long as the enemy is within melee reach of both the gang leader
and one of the gang leader’s allies.
Quick Draw  The gang leader Interacts to draw a weapon, then Strikes with
that weapon.
Sneak Attack The gang leader deals an extra 2d6 precision damage to flat-footed creatures.

4122003

GANG LEADER

249

18834057

4122004

4122004


Gamemastery Guide

GLOSSARY AND INDEX

This appendix contains page references for key terms
appearing in this book, partial definitions for many rules
and concepts, and full definitions for the traits introduced
in this book. Definitions of other traits used in this book
can be found in the Glossary and Index beginning on
page 628 of the Core Rulebook.
Abaddon (plane) The neutral evil Outer Plane, a wasteland
home to soul-devouring daemons and the Four Horsemen
of the Apocalypse. 142
Ability Points Points used to purchase ability scores in a
point-buy ability score variant rule. 182
ability scores (variant rule) These variant rules include an
alternate ability score system that works entirely through
Ability Points, plus ways to distribute what each ability
score impacts more evenly. 182
Abyss (plane) The chaotic evil Outer Plane where demons and
qlippoth fight for dominion. 142
access Certain uncommon abilities, feats, and other options
have an Access entry. Characters who meet the criteria in
the entry gain access to that option. 35
acolyte of Nethys (NPC) 212
acrobat (NPC) 236
addiction (affliction) 120
adept (NPC) 228
adjudicating rules 12, 28
adventures
designing 40
styles 41
threats 43
advisor (NPC) 207
aerial combat 15
affliction 116
air (trait) Planes with this trait consist mostly of open spaces
and air with various degrees of turbulence, though they also
contain rare islands of floating stone and other elements
and energies. 137
alignment (variant rule) These variant rules contain options for
removing alignment and an incremental alignment system. 184
ancestry adjustment Simple changes added to an NPC stat
block to represent a specific ancestry. 204
animate dream Independent creatures formed when a powerful
mortal dreamer wakes from a particularly vivid dream. 145
antipaladin (NPC) 247
apothecary (NPC) 220
apprentice (NPC) 244
aquatic combat 15
archer sentry (NPC) 233
artifact (trait) Items with this trait are artifacts. These magic
items can’t be crafted by normal means, and they can’t be
damaged by normal means. Artifacts are always rare or
unique. 106
aspect The overarching concepts a specific relic embodies,
dictating the types of gifts that relic can gain. 95
assassin (NPC) 211

18834058

18834058

Astral Plane A Transitive Plane that separates the Inner
Sphere from the planes of the Outer Sphere. 140
astronomer (NPC) 241
Awareness Points A measure of the opposition’s awareness of
the PCs’ efforts during an infiltration. As Awareness Points
increase, the infiltration becomes more challenging. 161
Axis (plane) The lawful neutral Outer Plane is a perfectly
structured, near-infinite city populated by aeons. 142
azer Short, sturdy, and industrious humanoids native to the
Elemental Plane of Fire. 140
background (variant rule) Replace simply selecting a
background with a series of steps that flesh out more of the
character’s backstory. 186
bandit (NPC) 208
barkeep (NPC) 238
barrister (NPC) 232
beast tamer (NPC) 237
beggar (NPC) 214
Board  (action) Board a vehicle. 175
bodyguard (NPC) 226
Boneyard (plane) The neutral Outer Plane, a great spire rising
into the Astral Plane where souls of the dead are judged
and sent on to their respective afterlives. 142
bosun (NPC) 243
bounty hunter (NPC) 227
Bullying Press [reaction] (action) A dueling reaction to make your
opponent frightened on a successful Strike. 167
burglar (NPC) 210
campaign
rewards 38
starting and ending 39
structure 36
captain of the guard (NPC) 234
Change Tradition Focus  (action) Change your tradition
focus in a spellcasting duel. 167
charlatan (NPC) 209
Chase Points These points represent the ability of an entire
party to bypass an obstacle in the chase subsystem. 156
chase subsystem A short-term subsystem wherein the PCs
progress through various situations and obstacles. 156
chronicler (NPC) 216
city (trait) Settlements with this trait tend to be relatively
large, with levels typically ranging from 5 to 7. 134
class features (variant rule) Build characters who gain feats in
different ways. 192
commoner (NPC) 214
courtiers 206
creature
building 56
converting from First Edition 60
designing abilities 67
designing NPCs 72
improvising 61
trait abilities 70
criminals 208
cult leader (NPC) 230

4122004

250

18834058

4122005

4122005

18834059

18834059


Glossary and index

cultist (NPC) 229
curse (trait) Afflictions with this trait are manifestations of
potent ill will. A curse either lasts a specified amount of
time or can be removed only by certain actions a character
must perform or conditions they must meet. A curse with
stages follows the rules for afflictions. 116
curse (affliction) 116
cursed (trait) An item with this trait is cursed to cause trouble for
its owner. A curse isn’t detected when the item is identified,
though a critical success reveals both the presence and exact
nature of the curse. Cursed items can’t be discarded once
they’ve been triggered or invested the first time. The item
can be removed only if the curse is removed. 90
dancer (NPC) 236
Deceptive Sidestep [reaction] (action) A dueling reaction forcing your
opponent to roll again and use the second result. 167
deities 127
demiplane A smaller, limited plane either created for specific
purposes or arising from planar phenomena. 145
demonologist (NPC) 231
Denizen of Leng Humanoid residents of the area of the
Dreamlands known as the Plateau of Leng. 145
despot (NPC) 248
devotees 212
Dimension of Time (dimension) A hidden dimension that
simultaneously contains all time across all planes. 145
dimension Similar to planes, dimensions have an infinite scale
and overlay every other plane simultaneously, including
one another. 144
Discover (action) Watch or study an NPC to learn more
about that NPC’s preferences; used in the influence
subsystem. 151
disease (trait) An effect with this trait inflicts one or more
diseases. A disease is typically an affliction. 118
dockhand (NPC) 222
downtime
events 25
long-term goals 22
downtrodden 214
Dreamlands (dimension) A dimension created and sustained
by the collective dreams of sleeping mortals. 145
Drive [one-action] to [three-actions] (action) Pilot a vehicle to move. 175
drug (trait) An item with this trait is a drug, a poison that
conveys short-term benefits in addition to harmful side
effects and long-term consequences. Each time a creature
uses a given drug it must also attempt a saving throw
against addiction to that drug. 120
drug (affliction) 120
drunkard (NPC) 239
dual-class character (variant rule) A character who has the
full benefits of two different classes. 192
duel subsystem A subsystem for a one-on-one combat or
spellcasting competition wherein the participants abide
by specific rules agreed upon before the duel begins. 166
Dueling Counter [reaction] (action) Expend a prepared spell or spell
slot to attempt to counteract a spell. 167

d’ziriak Reclusive, sapient insect-like creatures native to the
Shadow Plane. 141
earth (trait) Planes with this trait are mostly solid, with
caverns and other hollow pockets. 137
Edge Points These points represent special advantages a
party can gain before or during an infiltration, which they
can spend to more easily overcome an obstacle. 162
Elysium (plane) The chaotic good Outer Plane, a realm of wild,
idealized natural beauty populated primarily by azatas. 143
encounter
designing 46
dynamic 48
locations 46
pitfalls 50
running 10
social 16, 51
treasure by encounter 51
Encouraging Words [one-action] (feat) Bolster an ally to regain
Stamina Points during combat; used in the stamina variant
rules. 201
environment
describing 17
in hexploration 172
in worldbuilding 123
erratic (trait) Planes with this trait have a flow of time that
slows down or speeds up relative to other planes. 137
Ethereal Plane A misty Transitive Plane overlapping each of
the planes of the Inner Sphere, formed by the interacting
tidal forces of creation and destruction from the Positive
and Negative Energy Planes. 141
executioner (NPC) 235
exploration
activities 17
running 17
explorers 216
false priest (NPC) 229
farmer (NPC) 222
feats (variant rule) Build characters who gain feats in different
ways. 192
fence (NPC) 210
fetchling (kayal) Members of this ancestry are descended
from humans who long ago became trapped on the Shadow
Plane. 141
finite (trait) Planes with this trait consist of a limited amount
of space. 136
fire (trait) Planes with this trait are composed of flames
that continually burn with no fuel source. Fire planes are
extremely hostile to non-fire creatures. 137
First World (plane) The First World was a first draft of
the Material Plane, crafted by the gods to test their
metaphysical crafting materials and palettes before setting
it aside to create the Material Plane as a second, final
version of their work. 141
flowing (trait) Planes with this trait have a flow of time that is
consistently faster or slower than that of other planes. 137
foresters 218

introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4122005

251

18834059

4122006

4122006


Gamemastery Guide

Fortify Camp (action) Spend time fortifying your camp for
defense; used in the hexploration subsystem. 173
gang leader (NPC) 249
getting lost 21
gift A magical benefit granted by a relic. Gifts are categorized
into three tiers representing their power: minor, major, and
grand. 96
grave robber (NPC) 208
gravedigger (NPC) 223
Great Old One A powerful alien entity akin to a demigod in
power. 108, 139
group activity In the hexploration subsystem, group activities
require the entire party to work together in order to be
effective. They count as one of the day’s hexploration
activities for the whole group. 172
group size 33
guard (NPC) 232
guide (NPC) 217
guildmaster (NPC) 245
harbormaster (NPC) 225
harrow reader (NPC) 228
hazard
building 74
complex 80
in exploration 20
simple 77
healers 220
Heaven (plane) The lawful good Outer Plane, a great
seven‑tiered mountain devoted to defending the innocent
and destroying the wicked. 143
Hell (plane) The lawful evil Outer Plane is a realm of tyranny
and perfectly ordered, malignant law, inhabited primarily
by devils. 144
Hero Points 9
hexploration subsystem A subsystem for exploration using
an overland map divided into hexagonal sections of
territory. 170
high gravity (trait) Planes with this trait have gravitational
forces much stronger than those on the Material Plane. 136
house rules The collection of rulings on, changes to, and
additions to the written rules the GM and players
collectively agree to use during their games. 29
hunter (NPC) 219
immeasurable (trait) Planes with this trait are immeasurably
large, perhaps infinite. 136
Infiltration Points A measure of the heroes’ progress toward
overcoming obstacles during an infiltration. 160
infiltration subsystem A subsystem providing a framework
for a party to achieve objectives through subtlety rather
than direct confrontation. 160
Influence (action) Attempt to make a favorable impression on
an NPC to convince the NPC to support your cause; used in
the influence subsystem. 151
Influence Points These points, used in the influence subsystem,
measure a character’s growing sway over a particular NPC. 151
influence subsystem A short-term subsystem wherein the PCs

18834060

18834060

accumulate Influence Points during a social encounter with
an NPC to represent their increasing influence. 151
initiative 11
Inner Sphere The planes of the Inner Sphere form the heart
of the cosmos. The most prominent are the Material Plane,
the Elemental Planes, and the Positive and Negative Energy
Planes. 138
innkeeper (NPC) 239
intelligent (trait) An item with this trait is intelligent and has
its own will and personality, as well as several statistics that
most items don’t have. Intelligent items can’t be crafted by
normal means, and they are always rare or unique. 88
investigation A type of exploration scene wherein the PCs
learn more about a situation, solve a puzzle, or uncover
mysteries. 21
item
artifacts 106
building 82
buying and selling 24
cursed 90
gems and art objects 114
intelligent 88
magic item variant rules 196
quirks 86
relics 94
jailer (NPC) 233
judge (NPC) 224
jyoti Xenophobic winged, birdlike creatures native to the
Positive Energy Plane. 139
laborers 222
leadership subsystem A long-term subsystem wherein one or
more PCs establish a fledgling organization and accumulate
followers over time. 168
Leng spider A species of immense, intelligent spiders native to
the Plateau of Leng in the Dreamlands. 145
level 0 character (variant rule) Play through your characters’
adventures before they take on character classes. 195
librarian (NPC) 240
library The setting in which the characters perform research
when using the research subsystem. A library can be a
vault of books or any other repository of information. 154
low gravity (trait) Planes with this trait have gravitational
forces much weaker than those on the Material Plane. 136
Maelstrom (plane) The chaotic neutral Outer Plane is an
ancient ocean of raw chaos, eternally wearing away
portions of other planes and inhabited primarily by
proteans. 144
mage for hire (NPC) 226
magistrates 224
Map the Area (action) Create an accurate map of a hex; used in
the hexploration subsystem. 173
maps and mapping
drawing maps 52
for settlements 126
for worlds 123
in encounter mode 13, 46

4122006

252

18834060

4122007

4122007

18834061

18834061


Glossary and index

mastermind (NPC) 246
Material Plane The plane containing the prosaic universe, and
the home of mortal life. 138
mercenaries 226
merchant (NPC) 244
metagaming A player using knowledge they have but their
character lacks to inform their character’s decisions and
actions in the game. 9
metamorphic (trait) On planes with this trait, the plane’s
physical nature can be changed by things other than
physical force or magic. 137
metropolis (trait) Settlements with this trait are the largest of
cities, often with a level of 8 or higher. 134
microgravity (trait) Planes with this trait have little to no
gravity. 136
miner (NPC) 223
monster hunter (NPC) 227
mounted combat 14
movement 14
mystics 228
nation 125, 130
navigator (NPC) 242
necromancer (NPC) 230
negative (trait) Planes with this trait are vast, empty reaches
that suck the life from the living. 137
Negative Energy Plane A plane in the Inner Sphere suffused
with negative energy, home to sceaduinars, wraiths, and
undead. 139
Nirvana (plane) The neutral good Outer Plane is the realm of
purest good, a plane that promises sanctuary to the weary
and enlightenment and transcendence to those who seek
it out. 144
noble (NPC) 206
nonplayer character (NPC)
ancestry adjustments 204
class road maps and abilities 73
customizing 203
designing 72
portraying 9
specialists 204
officers 232
Outer Sphere The planes of the Outer Sphere are the realms
of alignment: chaos, evil, good, law, neutrality, and their
admixtures, populated by celestials, fiends, monitors,
and others who embody and promote these moral
concepts. 141
palace guard (NPC) 206
Pathfinder Society Organized Play A worldwide organization
of players and GMs playing in a shared, ongoing Pathfinder
campaign. 33, 165
performers 236
petitioner The soul of a dead mortal who has been judged and
sent on to whichever plane best reflects the life they led. 138
physician (NPC) 220
piloting check A skill check required to perform certain
actions when piloting a vehicle. 175

pirate (NPC) 242
plague doctor (NPC) 221
Plane of Air The innermost of the Elemental Planes, a vast
realm of wind, storms, and skies. 139
Plane of Earth An Elemental Plane situated between the Plane
of Fire and Plane of Water, consisting of a thick, rocky shell
riddled with vast caverns and open pockets. 139
Plane of Fire This Elemental Plane is a perpetual ocean of fire
with skies of smoke, storms of raining cinders, and lakes
and rivers of magma flowing along its border with the
Elemental Plane of Earth. 140
Plane of Water An Elemental Plane located between the Plane
of Air and the Plane of Earth, consisting of a nearly limitless
expanse of saline, fresh, and brackish seas teeming with
oceanic life. 140
planes Vast or infinite realms that each embody some
foundational aspect of reality, existing beyond and in
addition to the physical universe. 136
player
goals 36
motivations 40, 44
needs 34
problematic 31
poacher (NPC) 218
poison (trait) An effect with this trait delivers a poison or deals
poison damage. An item with this trait is poisonous and
might cause an affliction. 120
positive (trait) Planes with this trait are awash with life energy
of such intensity that it can harm living creatures. 137
Positive Energy Plane A plane in the Inner Sphere that contains
the source of all positive energy in the multiverse. 139
potency bonus A special bonus used only in the automatic
bonus progression variant rule for magic items, representing
a character’s innate ability and replacing the item bonus to
rolls and DCs (except armor’s item bonus). 196
priest of Pharasma (NPC) 213
primeval inevitable The first of the inevitables produced by
the axiomites for their war against the proteans have since
ascended to become demigods. 142
prisoner (NPC) 215
proficiency (variant rule) A proficiency without level system
changes the fundamental math of the proficiency system
to tell stories where being outnumbered by weaker foes
remains a challenge and high-level characters are less
superhuman. 198
prophet (NPC) 212
propulsion The means by which a vehicle moves, often
imposing additional rules on the vehicle. 174
publicans 238
qlippoth The original inhabitants of the Abyss, inhuman
monstrosities of pure chaos and malice. 142
quintessence A philosophically aligned material with infinite
potential for shape and state that conforms to powerful and
prevailing beliefs. 137
Rally (action) Quickly encourage an ally to regain Stamina
Points; used in the stamina variant rules. 201

introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery
GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4122007

253

18834061

4122008

4122008


Gamemastery Guide

rarity How often something is encountered in the game
world. The rarities are common, uncommon, rare, and
unique. Any rules element that doesn’t list a rarity is
common. 35
reckless (trait) Actions with the reckless trait run the risk of
the pilot losing control of a vehicle. When performing a
reckless action, the pilot must first attempt an appropriate
piloting check to keep control of the vehicle. 176
reckless scientist (NPC) 248
Reconnoiter (action) Survey and explore a specific area to find
unusual features and specific sites; used in the hexploration
subsystem. 173
Reputation Points In the reputation subsystem, these points
measure a character’s social standing with a given group of
people. 164
reputation subsystem A mid- to long-term subsystem wherein
the PCs accumulate or lose Reputation Points with a
particular group of people. 164
Research (action) Comb through information to learn more
about the topic at hand and gain Research Points; used in
the research subsystem. 154
Research Points (RP) Points representing the progress a party
makes toward discovering information in the research
subsystem. 154
research subsystem A short-term subsystem used when the
party needs to discover information within a time limit or
other restrictions. 154
Resolve Points A pool of points in the stamina variant rules
representing a character’s intrinsic grit and luck. 200
retraining 26
reward
in campaigns 38
in subsystems 150
ruffian (NPC) 209
Run Over [three-actions] (action) Run over or ram creatures with a
vehicle you’re piloting. 176
saboteur (NPC) 246
sage (NPC) 241
sandbox A game where the GM presents an open world and
the players explore as they like, rather than a GM-directed
narrative. 44
sceaduinar The most common inhabitants of the Negative
Energy Plane, crystalline humanoids formed from pure
negative energy. 139
scholars 240
seafarers 242
secret check 8
Sense Weakness [reaction] (action) A dueling reaction to make your
opponent flat-footed against your Strike. 167
sentient (trait) Planes with this trait can change their physical
nature according to the plane’s own whim. 137
servant (NPC) 222
server (NPC) 238
session zero A session for building characters as a group
before the campaign officially begins. 7
settlement 126, 132

18834062

18834062

shadow (trait) Planes with this trait are umbral with murky
light and suppress all light sources. 138
Shadow Plane A murky, distorted, and imperfect mirror of the
Material Plane that overlaps the Material Plane and serves
as a buffer or conduit between it and the Negative Energy
Plane. 141
ship captain (NPC) 243
Skill Points (variant rule) In a more granular system, characters
spend Skill Points to choose and hone their skills. 199
smith (NPC) 245
spy (NPC) 207
Stamina Points (variant rule) Stamina Points represent a
character’s energy and readiness. They’re reduced by
damage just like Hit Points, but a character always loses
their Stamina Points first, and loses Hit Points only if
they’re out of Stamina Points. 200
static (trait) The physical nature of a plane with this trait can’t
be changed in any way. 137
Steel Your Resolve [one-action] (feat) Regain Stamina Points quickly
during a fight; used in the stamina variant rules. 201
Stop [one-action] (action) Bring a vehicle to a stop. 176
strange gravity (trait) On planes with this trait, all bodies of
mass, regardless of size, are centers of gravity with roughly
the same amount of force. 136
subjective gravity (trait) On planes with this trait, all bodies
of mass can be centers of gravity with the same amount of
force, but only if a non-mindless creature wills it. 136
surgeon (NPC) 221
surprise attack 21
Take a Breather (action) Rest for 10 minutes to regain Stamina
Points; used in the stamina variant rules. 200
Take Control [one-action] (action) Become the pilot of an uncontrolled
vehicle. 176
tax collector (NPC) 224
teacher (NPC) 240
threat level Encounters in a published adventure give an
indication of the expected party level and how difficult that
encounter is for that level of party. 16
timeless (trait) On planes with this trait, time still passes but
its effects are diminished. 137
tomb raider (NPC) 217
torchbearer (NPC) 216
total party kill (TPK) A situation in which every character in the
party dies, sometimes ending the campaign prematurely. 30
touch of corruption (focus spell) 247
town (trait) Settlements with this trait are modest in size, with
a level usually ranging from 2–4. 134
tracker (NPC) 219
tradespeople 244
Transitive Plane A collection of planes that each coexist with
one or more other planes, often used to facilitate interplanar
travel. The most prominent are the Astral Plane, the Ethereal
Plane, the First World, and the Shadow Plane. 140
Travel (action) Progress toward moving into an adjacent hex;
used in the hexploration subsystem. 172
troubadour (NPC) 237

4122008

254

18834062

4122009

4122009

18834063

18834063


Glossary and index

unbounded (trait) Planes with this trait loop back on
themselves when a creature reaches the plane’s edge. 136
unexpected difficulty 16
urchin (NPC) 215
vehicle Vehicles are various means of transportation,
often with specific purposes, that come into play during
encounters and exploration. 174
velstrac Horrific fiends residing on the Shadow Plane who seek
ultimate sensation and perfection through self-mutilation. 141
Victory Points (VP) A flexible point-based subsystem for
tracking progress toward a goal. 148
village (trait) Settlements with this trait tend to be small and
usually have a level no higher than 1. 134
villains
in NPC gallery 246
OPEN GAME LICENSE Version 1.0a
The following text is the property of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and is Copyright 2000 Wizards of the Coast, Inc.
(“Wizards”). All Rights Reserved.
1. Definitions: (a) “Contributors” means the copyright and/or trademark owners who have contributed Open Game
Content; (b) “Derivative Material” means copyrighted material including derivative works and translations (including
into other computer languages), potation, modification, correction, addition, extension, upgrade, improvement,
compilation, abridgment or other form in which an existing work may be recast, transformed or adapted; (c)
“Distribute” means to reproduce, license, rent, lease, sell, broadcast, publicly display, transmit or otherwise distribute;
(d) “Open Game Content” means the game mechanic and includes the methods, procedures, processes and routines
to the extent such content does not embody the Product Identity and is an enhancement over the prior art and any
additional content clearly identified as Open Game Content by the Contributor, and means any work covered by this
License, including translations and derivative works under copyright law, but specifically excludes Product Identity.
(e) “Product Identity” means product and product line names, logos and identifying marks including trade dress;
artifacts, creatures, characters, stories, storylines, plots, thematic elements, dialogue, incidents, language, artwork,
symbols, designs, depictions, likenesses, formats, poses, concepts, themes and graphic, photographic and other visual
or audio representations; names and descriptions of characters, spells, enchantments, personalities, teams, personas,
likenesses and special abilities; places, locations, environments, creatures, equipment, magical or supernatural abilities
or effects, logos, symbols, or graphic designs; and any other trademark or registered trademark clearly identified as
Product identity by the owner of the Product Identity, and which specifically excludes the Open Game Content; (f)
“Trademark” means the logos, names, mark, sign, motto, designs that are used by a Contributor to identify itself or
its products or the associated products contributed to the Open Game License by the Contributor (g) “Use”, “Used”
or “Using” means to use, Distribute, copy, edit, format, modify, translate and otherwise create Derivative Material of
Open Game Content. (h) “You” or “Your” means the licensee in terms of this agreement.
2. The License: This License applies to any Open Game Content that contains a notice indicating that the Open
Game Content may only be Used under and in terms of this License. You must affix such a notice to any Open Game
Content that you Use. No terms may be added to or subtracted from this License except as described by the License
itself. No other terms or conditions may be applied to any Open Game Content distributed using this License.
3. Offer and Acceptance: By Using the Open Game Content You indicate Your acceptance of the terms of
this License.
4. Grant and Consideration: In consideration for agreeing to use this License, the Contributors grant You a
perpetual, worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive license with the exact terms of this License to Use, the Open
Game Content.
5. Representation of Authority to Contribute: If You are contributing original material as Open Game Content,
You represent that Your Contributions are Your original creation and/or You have sufficient rights to grant the rights
conveyed by this License.
6. Notice of License Copyright: You must update the COPYRIGHT NOTICE portion of this License to include the
exact text of the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any Open Game Content You are copying, modifying or distributing, and You
must add the title, the copyright date, and the copyright holder’s name to the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any original
Open Game Content you Distribute.
7. Use of Product Identity: You agree not to Use any Product Identity, including as an indication as to
compatibility, except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of each element of
that Product Identity. You agree not to indicate compatibility or co-adaptability with any Trademark or Registered
Trademark in conjunction with a work containing Open Game Content except as expressly licensed in another,
independent Agreement with the owner of such Trademark or Registered Trademark. The use of any Product Identity
in Open Game Content does not constitute a challenge to the ownership of that Product Identity. The owner of any
Product Identity used in Open Game Content shall retain all rights, title and interest in and to that Product Identity.
8. Identification: If you distribute Open Game Content You must clearly indicate which portions of the work that
you are distributing are Open Game Content.
9. Updating the License: Wizards or its designated Agents may publish updated versions of this License. You
may use any authorized version of this License to copy, modify and distribute any Open Game Content originally
distributed under any version of this License.
10. Copy of this License: You MUST include a copy of this License with every copy of the Open Game Content
You distribute.
11. Use of Contributor Credits: You may not market or advertise the Open Game Content using the name of any
Contributor unless You have written permission from the Contributor to do so.
12. Inability to Comply: If it is impossible for You to comply with any of the terms of this License with respect to
some or all of the Open Game Content due to statute, judicial order, or governmental regulation then You may not Use
any Open Game Material so affected.
13. Termination: This License will terminate automatically if You fail to comply with all terms herein and fail to
cure such breach within 30 days of becoming aware of the breach. All sublicenses shall survive the termination of
this License.
14. Reformation: If any provision of this License is held to be unenforceable, such provision shall be reformed only
to the extent necessary to make it enforceable.
15. COPYRIGHT NOTICE
Open Game License v 1.0a © 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc.
System Reference Document © 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc; Authors: Jonathan Tweet, Monte Cook, Skip
Williams, based on material by E. Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson.
The Book of Fiends © 2003, Green Ronin Publishing; Authors: Aaron Loeb, Erik Mona, Chris Pramas, and Robert
J. Schwalb.
Armies of the Abyss © 2002, Green Ronin Publishing; Authors: Erik Mona and Chris Pramas.
The Avatar’s Handbook © 2003, Green Ronin Publishing; Authors: Jesse Decker and Chris Thomasson.
Book of the Righteous © 2002, Aaron Loeb.
Legions of Hell © 2001, Green Ronin Publishing; Author: Chris Pramas.
The Unholy Warrior’s Handbook © 2003, Green Ronin Publishing; Author: Robert J. Schwalb.
Pathfinder Core Rulebook (Second Edition) © 2019, Paizo Inc.; Authors: Logan Bonner, Jason Bulmahn, Stephen
Radney-MacFarland, and Mark Seifter.
Genie, Marid from the Tome of Horrors Complete © 2011, Necromancer Games, Inc., published and distributed by
Frog God Games; Author: Scott Greene, based on original material by Gary Gygax.
Pathfinder Gamemastery Guide © 2020, Paizo Inc.; Authors: Alexander Augunas, Jesse Benner, John Bennett,
Logan Bonner, Clinton J. Boomer, Jason Bulmahn, James Case, Paris Crenshaw, Jesse Decker, Robert N. Emerson, Eleanor
Ferron, Jaym Gates, Matthew Goetz, T.H. Gulliver, Kev Hamilton, Sasha Laranoa Harving, BJ Hensley, Vanessa Hoskins,
Brian R. James, Jason LeMaitre, Lyz Liddell, Luis Loza, Colm Lundberg, Ron Lundeen, Stephen Radney-MacFarland,
Jessica Redekop, Alistair Rigg, Mark Seifter, Owen K.C. Stephens, Amber Stewart, Christina Stiles, Landon Winkler,
and Linda Zayas-Palmer.

motivations 47
recurring 37
virulent (trait) Afflictions with the virulent trait are harder
to remove. You must succeed at two consecutive saves to
reduce a virulent affliction’s stage by 1. A critical success
reduces a virulent affliction’s stage by only 1 instead of
by 2.
warden (NPC) 225
watch officer (NPC) 234
water (trait) Planes with this trait are mostly liquid, perhaps
with pockets of breathable air. 137
worldbuilding Creating a campaign setting of your own
design. 122
zealot of Asmodeus (NPC) 213

introduction
Gamemastery
Basics
Tools
Subsystems
Variant Rules
NPC Gallery

PAIZO INC.

Creative Directors • James Jacobs, Robert G. McCreary, and Sarah E. Robinson
Director of Game Design • Jason Bulmahn
Managing Developers • Adam Daigle and Amanda Hamon
Organized Play Lead Developer • Linda Zayas-Palmer
Developers • Eleanor Ferron, Jason Keeley, Luis Loza, Ron Lundeen, Patrick Renie,
Michael Sayre, and Jason Tondro
Starfinder Lead Designer • Joe Pasini
Starfinder Senior Developer • John Compton
Starfinder Society Developer • Thurston Hillman
Designers • Logan Bonner, Lyz Liddell, and Mark Seifter
Managing Editor • Judy Bauer
Editors • James Case, Leo Glass, Avi Kool, Adrian Ng, and Lu Pellazar
Art Directors • Kent Hamilton and Sonja Morris
Senior Graphic Designers • Emily Crowell and Adam Vick
Production Artist • Tony Barnett
Franchise Manager • Mark Moreland

GLOSSARY
and INDEX

4122009

Paizo CEO • Lisa Stevens
Chief Creative Officer • Erik Mona
Chief Financial Officer • John Parrish
Chief Operations Officer • Jeffrey Alvarez
Chief Technical Officer • Vic Wertz
Program Manager • Glenn Elliott
Director of Sales • Pierce Watters
Sales Associate • Cosmo Eisele
Vice President of Marketing & Licensing • Jim Butler
Public Relations Manager • Aaron Shanks
Social Media Producer • Payton Smith
Customer Service & Community Manager • Sara Marie
Operations Manager • Will Chase
Organized Play Manager • Tonya Woldridge
Human Resources Generalist • Angi Hodgson
Accountant • William Jorenby
Data Entry Clerk • B. Scott Keim
Director of Technology • Raimi Kong
Senior Software Developer • Gary Teter
Webstore Coordinator • Katina Davis
Customer Service Team • Joan Hong, Virginia Jordan, Samantha Phelan, and
Diego Valdez
Warehouse Team • Laura Wilkes Carey, Mika Hawkins, Heather Payne, Jeff Strand, and
Kevin Underwood
Website Team • Brian Bauman, Robert Brandenburg, Whitney Chatterjee, Erik Keith,
Josh Thornton, and Andrew White
This product is compliant with the Open Game License (OGL) and is suitable for use with the Pathfinder
Roleplaying Game (Second Edition).
Product Identity: The following items are hereby identified as Product Identity, as defined in the Open
Game License version 1.0a, Section 1(e), and are not Open Game Content: All trademarks, registered
trademarks, proper nouns (characters, deities, locations, etc., as well as all adjectives, names, titles, and
descriptive terms derived from proper nouns), artworks, characters, dialogue, locations, organizations, plots,
storylines, and trade dress. (Elements that have previously been designated as Open Game Content, or are
exclusively derived from previous Open Game Content, or that are in the public domain are not included in
this declaration.)
Open Game Content: Except for material designated as Product Identity, the game mechanics of this Paizo
game product are Open Game Content, as defined in the Open Game License version 1.0a, Section 1(d). No
portion of this work other than the material designated as Open Game Content may be reproduced in any form
without written permission.
Pathfinder Gamemastery Guide © 2020, Paizo Inc. Paizo, the Paizo golem logo, Pathfinder, the Pathfinder logo,
Pathfinder Society, Starfinder, and the Starfinder logo are registered trademarks of Paizo Inc.; the Pathfinder
P logo, Pathfinder Accessories, Pathfinder Adventure Card Game, Pathfinder Adventure Card Society,
Pathfinder Adventure Path, Pathfinder Adventures, Pathfinder Battles, Pathfinder Cards, Pathfinder Combat
Pad, Pathfinder Flip-Mat, Pathfinder Flip-Tiles, Pathfinder Legends, Pathfinder Lost Omens, Pathfinder Pawns,
Pathfinder Roleplaying Game, Pathfinder Tales, Starfinder Adventure Path, Starfinder Combat Pad, Starfinder
Flip-Mat, Starfinder Pawns, Starfinder Roleplaying Game, and Starfinder Society are trademarks of Paizo Inc.
Printed in China.

255

18834063

4122010

4122010


Second Edition

18834064

18834064

4122010

Lost Omens
World Guide
THIS COMPREHENSIVE HARDCOVER OVERVIEW OF THE WORLD OF PATHFINDER PROVIDES EVERYTHING YOU NEED TO KNOW
FOR A LIFETIME OF ADVENTURE IN THE AGE OF LOST OMENS. THE GOD OF HUMANITY IS DEAD AND PROPHECY IS BROKEN,
LEAVING HEROES JUST LIKE YOU TO CARVE THEIR OWN DESTINIES OUT OF AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE!

HARDCOVER $36.99
© 2020, Paizo Inc. Paizo, the Paizo golem logo, Pathfinder, and the Pathfinder logo are registered trademarks of Paizo Inc.;
the Pathfinder P logo, Pathfinder Adventure Path, Pathfinder Roleplaying Game, and Pathfinder Lost Omens are trademarks of Paizo Inc.


paizo.com/pathfinder

18834064

Rulebook

Second Edition

Make Your Game Your Own!

Gamemastery Guide

As the Game Master of a Pathfinder campaign, you’re the architect of your
players’ adventures—a rewarding but sometimes challenging responsibility.
With this book, your job just got a whole lot easier! Whether you’re building
your own monsters and adventures, looking for new subsystems to play out
cinematic chases or tense infiltrations, or simply want to speed up your game
with scores of NPCs ready for action, the Gamemastery Guide has you covered!

Gamemastery
Guide
Logan Bonner and Mark Seifter
paizo.com/pathfinder
Printed in China.

PZO2103

